Y O U R

How It Works
(r
How to Improve It
SECOND

EDITION

KENNETH L. HIGBEE, PHD.

Marlowe & Company
New York

First Marlowe & Company edition, 1996
Published by
Marlowe & Company
632 Broadway, Seventh Floor
New York, NY 10012
Copyright ©. 1977,1988 and 1996 by Kenneth L. Higbee
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form, without written permission from the publishers, unless by a reviewer who wishes to
quote brief passages.
Manufactured in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Higbee, Kenneth L., 1941Your memory : how it works and how to improve it / Kenneth L.
Higbee. —2nd ed.
p. cm.
Originally published : New York : Prentice Hall, cl988.
Includes bibliographical reference and index.
ISBN 1-56924-801-X
1. Mnemonics. 2. Memory. I. Title
BF385.H48 1996
153. 1 '4—dc20
95-49468
CIP

To Dawn, Janelle, Loren, andLana, who
have accepted their roles as children of a
memory researcher and willingly (?) tried
many of the techniques in this book.

Contents

INTRODUCTION:
THIS BOOK?

WHAT CAN YOU EXPECT

FROM
xi

Why Did I Write It? • Why Should You Read It? • What
Will You Find in It?

WHAT CAN YOU EXPECT FROM
MEMORY? TEN MYTHS

YOUR

Myth 1: Memory Is a Thing • Myth 2: There Is a Secret
to a Good Memory • Myth 3: There Is an Easy Way to
Memorize • Myth 4: Some People Are Stuck with Bad
Memories • Myth 5: Some People Are Blessed with
Photographic Memories • Myth 6: Some People Are Too
Old/Young to Improve Their Memories • Myth 7:
Memory, Like a Muscle, Benefits from Exercise • Myth 8:
A Trained Memory Never Forgets • Myth 9:
Remembering Too Much Can Clutter Your Mind • Myth
10: People Only Use 10 Percent of Their Mental
Potential

MEET YOUR MEMORY:

WHAT IS IT?

What Are the Stages and Processes of Memory? • What
Is Short-term Memory? • What Is Long-term Memory? •
What Are the Measures of Memory? • What Is the Tipof-the-longue Phenomenon?

16

viii

CONTENTS

MEET YOUR MEMORY: HOW DOES IT
WORK?

32

How and Why Do We Forget? • How Fast Do We
Forget? • How Do We Remember Pictures Versus
Words? • How Do Exceptional Memories Work? • How
Well Does Sleep Learning Work?

HOW TO REMEMBER
BASIC PRINCIPLES

ALMOST

ANYTHING:
46

Meaningfulness: "That Doesn't Make Sense" •
Organization: "Get It All Together" • Association: "That
Reminds Me" • Visualization: "I Can See It All Now" •
Attention: ' 'I Don't Get It''

HOW TO REMEMBER ALMOST ANYTHING
MORE BASIC PRINCIPLES

ELSE:
62

Repetition: "What Was That Again?" • Relaxation:
"Take It Easy" • Context: "Where Am I?" • Interest:
"What's It to Ya?" • Feedback: "How Are You Doing?"

6

STRATEGIES FOR EFFECTIVE
STUDY SKILLS

LEARNING:

Reduce Interference • Space It Out • Break It up? •
Recite It • Use a Study System • How Well Do the
Principles and Strategies Work?

74

ix

Contents

7

WORKING MIRACLES WITH YOUR MEMORY:
AN INTRODUCTION TO MNEMONICS

93

What Are Mnemonics? • First Letters and Keywords •
Basic Principles of Mnemonics • How to Make Effective
Visual Associations * More on Effective Mnemonics

8

THE LEGITIMACY OF MNEMONICS:
AND PSEUDO-LIMITATIONS

LIMITATIONS
113

Some Limitations of Mnemonics • Some PseudoLimitations of Mnemonics

9

MENTAL FIUNG SYSTEMS: LINK AND
STORY MNEMONICS

131

Your Mental Filing System • What Is the Link System? •
What Is the Story System? • How Well Do the Link and
Story Systems Work? • How Can You Use the Link and
Story Systems?

10
MENTAL FILING SYSTEMS:
MNEMONIC

LOCI
144

What Is the Loci System? • How Well Does the Loci
System Work? • How Can You Use the Loci System?

11
MENTAL FIUNG SYSTEMS: PEG MNEMONIC
What Is the Peg System? • How Well Does the Peg
System Work? • How Can You Use the Peg System?

157

X

CONTENTS

12

MENTAL FILING SYSTEMS: PHONETIC MNEMONIC

172

What Is the Phonetic System? • How Well Does the
Phonetic System Work? • How Can You Use the
Phonetic System?

13

USING MNEMONICS:
REMEMBERING
PEOPLE'S NAMES AND FACES

188

How Do We Remember Names and Faces? • A System
for Remembering Names and Faces • How Well Does
the System Work?

14

USING MNEMONICS:
AND EDUCATION

ABSENTMINDEDNESS
203

Absentmindedness • Prospective Remembering •
Retrospective Remembering • Mnemonics in Education
• Memory in Education
APPENDIX: KEYWORDS

FOR THE PHONETIC

SYSTEM

219

CHAPTER NOTES

223

INDEX

255

Introduction:
What Can You Expect from
This Book?

W

hat is memory? Why do you remember some things and forget
others? How can you remember more? Does it depend on what
you learn? Does it depend on how you learn? Were you born with a good
or a bad memory? Can a bad memory be improved? Can you develop a
photographic memory? How can you study more effectively? What are
mnemonics?* Can mnemonics improve your memory in everyday life?
How can you set up and use your own mental filing system? Can
mnemonics help you to remember people's names, to overcome absentmindedness, and to succeed in school? These are just a few of the
questions that will be answered in this book.
WHY DID I WRITE IT?
My interest in questions such as the ones above began when I first read
a book on memory improvement as a student in high school. I was
amazed at the things I could do with my memory by using mnemonic
techniques. Through the years I have continued to add memory books to
my personal library, and to learn and use new memory systems and
techniques. My reading of popular books on memory improvement has
supplemented my academic research and professional training as a
psychologist, giving me a balanced perspective between the popularized
treatments of memory training and the scientific research on learning
and memory. That balance is reflected in this book. I am a university
•Mnemonics are defined and discussed in chapter 7. However, since the word

mnemonic is used frequently in thefirstsix chapters, a brief definition is also given
here. The term mnemonic means "aiding the memory." Thus, a mnemonic system or
technique is literally any system or technique that aids the memory. Typically,
however, the term mnemonic refers to rather unusual, artificial memory aids.
xi

xii

INTRODUCTION: W H A T CAN Y O U E X P E C T FROM T H I S B O O K ?

professor of psychology who has a serious teaching and research interest
in memory improvement: I am not primarily a memory performer or a
self-proclaimed expert with "the greatest memory in the world." (There
are already plenty of those "experts" around!)
Since 19711 have given hundreds of lectures and conducted seminars and workshops throughout the United States and in a half dozen
other countries. I have taught memory improvement and reported my
memory research to diverse audiences, including psychologists and
memory researchers, business groups, professional groups, students,
children, and the elderly. During this period, I have also taught a college
course on memory improvement.
My teaching and research experiences have given me an idea of
what people want to know and need to know about memory. In fact, the
main reason I wrote the first edition of this book in 1976 was my inability
to find any one textbook that covered all these areas for my memory
course. More than a decade later, most books oh memory still tend to
fall into one of two categories: college textbooks on learning and memory
and popular books on mnenomics and memory training.
This book provides a reasonable balance between the textbooks and
the popular books. I like to think of it as the thinking person's memory
book. Methods, principles, and systems are related to relevant research
literature in such a way as to make the book accurate (so that it will be
valid to psychologists) but also understandable (so that it will be useful
to the layman). Feedback on the first edition indicates that this attempt
to combine scholarly accuracy with readability was successful.
Even though the original impetus for this book arose from my desire
to provide a textbook for students in my memory course, I have written
the book so that it can be used by anyone who is interested in improving
memory. This consideration has determined my choice of what subjects
to cover, what to say about them, and in what order to cover them. TJie
book is a practical, self-contained guide that you can study on your own
to understand and improve your memory.
WHY SHOULD YOU READ IT?
Comments made by students in my memory course suggest some of the
ways in which the contents of this book can aid you. Some representative
remarks selected from hundreds of comments written by students who
finished the book and the course follow.
By applying mnemonics I find myself to be more effective and more organized,
and to have a considerable amount of self-confidence that I had not experienced
before.

xiii Introduction: What Can You Expectfrom This Book?
If I could have learned these things early in my college career, I would have saved
many hours and probably had a higher grade point average.
I honestly did not think any of this memory business would be of help to me now
that I am out of school, but it really has.
The systems make learning seem more like a game than work. I almost feel
guilty it's so fun.
Truthfully, I had always been skeptical of mnemonic devices, especially in regards
to my ability to use them. Yet now I find them to be useful as well as fun.
I am now aware of some of the capabilities of the human mind (mine specifically)
which I previously thought were out of reach.
When you finish studying this book you, too, will have a better understanding of what your memory is and what it can do; you will be aware
of basic principles to guide you in improving your memory; and you will
have an extensive repertoire of learning strategies and mnemonic systems that will enable you to use some of the capabilities of your mind
that you may have thought previously were "out of reach." Specifically,
this book has five characteristics that should help you achieve these
results:
It is more practical than textbooks on learning and memory. Memory
textbooks are oriented generally toward an academic understanding of
memory theories and research, and contain little information on improving memory. Mnemonic techniques are not discussed or are touched on
only in passing as interesting oddities that are of little practical value.
This book avoids discussion of many theories and side issues that are of
interest to the academician and researcher but are not as important to
the layman. I have discovered through my teaching experiences that
most people are more concerned with improving their memories than
they are with understanding how their memories work.
This book is intended to be a practical guide to understanding and
improving your memory; therefore, the emphasis is more on how to do
it than on academic and theoretical issues of memory. Thus, only the
first three chapters are primarly devoted to understanding memory (the
"how it works" part), and they cover only what is necessary to be able
to use the other chapters (the "how to improve it" part).
It is less technical than textbooks on learning and memory. Besides
being academically oriented in content, most memory textbooks tend to
be written in a style that is too technical to be interesting and understandable to people without a background in psychology. These readers almost
need a psychologist to explain the book to them. This book was written

xiv

INTRODUCTION: W H A T CAN Y o u E X P E C T FROM T H I S B O O K ?

for the intelligent student and layman who does not have a background in
psychological research on learning and memory, and it is intended to
bridge the communication gap that sometimes exists between scientists
and laymen. Thus, the technical terms and professional jargon used in
many textbooks are avoided as much as possible, and such terms are
explained whenever they are used.
It is more technical than popular books on memory training. This
book is intended primarily to instruct, not to entertain (although I have
nothing against entertaining, and I try to combine the two whenever
possible). Thus, it is intended to be studied, not to be read like a novel
or a magazine article. It is intended more for people who are serious
about wanting to improve their memories than for people who want to
do some light reading.
In addition, although the primary emphasis of this book is on
improving your memory, some attention is also given to understanding
your memory. The serious reader not only learns how to use memory
techniques but gains an understanding of how and why they work; this
approach is not found in most popular books on the subject.
It is more objective than popular books on memory training. Many
popular books on memory training tend to be sensationalistic and somewhat unrealistic in their claims. For example, they give the reader the
impression that the mnemonic techniques discussed will help in every
possible learning task (with little or no effort), and that if you use the
right techniques you will never forget anything again. In addition, they
give the impression that mnemonic techniques are all-powerful and have
no limitations. Many books are sprinkled with such sensationalistic terms
as "super-power memory," "computer mind," and "amazing mental
powers." This book presents a more realistic perspective.
Mnemonics can make a significant contribution to memory in many
situations, but different principles and methods (discussed in this book)
can be applied in other situations. In addition, although mnemonic
techniques are very powerful for many kinds of learning, they do have
limitations. This book presents both the strengths and limitations of
mnemonics. I cannot promise you that after reading this book (or any
other book) you will be able to learn everything the first time you see or
hear it, and that you will never forget anytfiing you learn. However, I can
promise you that if you apply the methods described in this book, your
memory will improve significantly, and you will be able to do things with
your memory that you could not do before reading this book.
It is based on recent research evidence. Most popular books on
memory training do not present any sound evidence that the techniques

xv Introduction:

What Can You Expect from This Book?

really work. As a result, many people get the impression that mnemonics
and some other techniques are just gimmicks associated with showmanship, or that they are not practical, or that they are not worth the effort.
After reading such a book, people may say, "Well, that was interesting,"
and go on their way unchanged because they don't plan to give memory
demonstrations onstage. This book presents research evidence that
illustrates the strengths and weaknesses of the principles, techniques,
and systems discussed. Thus, what has actually been found to work is
discussed, rather than what someone says should work, or what seems
as if it should work. This approach should help you realize that the
techniques are based on sound scientific principles of learning: They can
make a significant contribution to practical memory tasks in everyday
life.
The research evidence in this book is recent, not what was known
about memory a decade or more ago. More than three-fourths of the
research references are dated after the first edition of this book was
published in 1977, with two-thirds of these new references dated during
the lastfiveyears.

WHAT WILL YOU FIND IN IT?
A lot has happened in the area of memory training since 1977. At least
two memory-training books that were originally published more than 25
years ago were reprinted in the 1980s. In addition, more than a dozen
new books have been published; two of these were written for general
audiences by psychologists and memory researchers, and another half
dozen were targeted at specific audiences—business executives, elderly
people, students. (And these are only the books I have read. Undoubtedly, there are others that I'm not even aware of!)
During the past decade, memory researchers and psychologists
have also shown an increased interest in mnemonics and other practical
aspects of memory (e.g., schoolwork, names andfeces,everyday experiences, absentmindedness, eyewitness testimony). This increased research interest was reflected in the first international conference on
practical aspects of memory in 1978; the second was held in 1987. (I
participated in both.) The appearance of several new journals that publish
primarily research on the practical aspects of memory and the publication
of several books dealing with research on mnemonics and other practical
aspects of memory underscore this redirected interest. What all this
means is that in 1988 there is at least as much, if not more, interest in
the topics that this book covers as there was when thefirstedition was
published in 1977.

xvi

INTRODUCTION: W H A T C A N Y O U E X P E C T FROM THIS B O O K ?

Chapter 1 clarifies some memory myths—misconceptions that many
people have about what they can expect from their memories. Chapters
2 and 3 give a basic understanding of the nature of memory and answer
some questions you may have about your memory. The first three
chapters serve as a foundation for understanding and using the rest of
the book. Chapters 4 and 5 discuss some principles on which effective
memory strategies (including most mnemonics) are based. Chapter 6
describes learning strategies that can help you learn material that may
not be especially suited for mnemonics. Chapters 7 and 8 give an
introduction to mnemonics, including the strengths and limitations of
mnemonic techniques and systems. Chapters 9 through 12 explain the
nature and uses of specific mnemonic systems as mentalfilingsystems.
Chapters 13 and 14 suggest additional practical uses of mnemonics in
three areas of everyday life: remembering people's names, overcoming
absentmindedness, and doing schoolwork.
As a result of a decade of experience with the first edition, I have
made many minor changes in content and organization to make the
second edition even more beneficial. Many of the topics covered in the
first edition have been expanded in the second edition, and many new
topics have been included. Some of these new topics are scattered
throughout the book, such as examples of how my memory students
have used mnemonics and the relevance of some memory aids to special
populations like the elderly, young children, students, and the learning
disabled. Other new topics have been added in specific sections: additional memory myths (chapter 1), the serial position effect and the
strategy of "thinking around it" (chapter 4), the effects of anxiety and
context on memory (chapter 5), the problem of maintaining newly learned
memory skills (chapter 8), and the role of mnemonics and memory in
education (chapter 14).
Another major change in the second edition is the updating of the
research references so that the book still reflects the most recent
findings. Most of the hundreds of hours I spent on the second edition
were spent finding and reading the relevant research published since
1976.1 read about the same number of articles and books for the second
as I did for the first edition (700-800); however, fewer than half of them
are included in the book.
The research activity on understanding and improving memory has
accelerated during the time since the first edition was written. Literally
thousands of research articles and scholarly books are relevant to the
topics covered in this book. (Indeed, whole books have been written on
topics that constitute only one section of a chapter in this book.) To cite
all of the relevant research would be unduly burdensome (both to me and

xvii Introduction:

What Can You Expect from This Book?

to you), so I have used two strategies to limit the number of references.
First, when several studies are relevant to a certain point, one or two of
the most recent studies have usually been cited. Second, articles or
books that review a number of studies havefrequentlybeen cited, rather
than the original studies.

Y O U R

II
What Can Ybu Expect from
Your Memory? Ten Myths

You, too, can have a photographic memory! With this new miracle
memory system, you will never again forget anything. It requires
no work or willpower, and anyone can use it immediately. Once you
learn this secret of a super-power memory you will be able to learn
everything perfectly and effortlessly!

F

or years, claims like these have been made in advertisements for
memory-training books and courses. In fact, these claims come from
actual advertisements I have read. If you think such claims sound too
good to be true, you are right. Yet they continue to attract people
because they are consistent with myths that many people believe about
what is involved in improving memory.
This chapter discusses some memory myths to give you a realistic
idea of what you can expect and what you cannot expect from your
memory. In some ways people expect too much from their memories; in
other ways they expect too little. At one extreme are people who believe
the fantastic claims like those in the advertisement above; at the other
extreme are people who believe they are stuck forever with a "bad"
memory, and there is nothing they can do about it. A realistic understanding of what the potential is for your memory can help you achieve
that potential.
As you read the following myths, keep in mind that some of them
may have a grain of truth. However, all the myths are false enough to be
misleading. Let's look at some memory myths that can affect what you
expect from your memory.
1

2

YOUR MEMORY

MYTH 1: MEMORY IS A THING
People often talk about their memories as if a memory were some thing
that they possess. They talk about having a good memory or a bad
memory like they talk about having good teeth or a bad heart; or they
speak of strong and weak memories like muscles (see myth 7); or they
say their memory is failing like their eyes are failing. Memory does not
exist in the sense of some thing (object, organ, gland, etc.) that can be
seen, touched, weighed, or X-rayed. We can't cut open a person's head
and say, "That's a good, healthy-looking memory" or "That memory
looks bad, it must come out" or "This person definitely needs a memory
transplant."
The word memory is merely an abstraction that refers to a process
rather than a structure. As one experienced memory researcher wrote
recently, "Over the past 10 years my ideas have moved progressively
away from a view of memory as a structural system—a 'thing in the
head'—and towards the viewpoint... of remembering as an activity."1
Not only is memory not an identifiable structure but the process cannot
even be located at an identifiable place in the brain: There is no one
particular part of the brain where all remembering occurs. (Researchers
do not even fully understand exactly what occurs when we remember,
let alone where it occurs.)
Thus, memory is more appropriately viewed as an abstract process
rather than as a tangible thing. Actually, however, memory may not even
be a single process, but rather a number of different processes (activities, skills, attributes, etc.). Recent approaches to memory are organized
around the idea of separate subsystems.2 There appear to be at least
three memory systems—sensory, short-term, and long-term—and
many psychologists believe that long-term memory is composed of
several different types of remembering (see chapter 2).
Even a specific memory of a specific object may consist of a number
of different attributes or categories.3 For example, you may remember a
particular chair in terms of its class (furniture), its characteristics (large),
its function (sitting), and its location (living room). Memories can also be
stored in different senses. There is a difference between remembering
what things look like, what they sound like, what they feel like, and what
they taste or smell like. Even within the same sense there can be
differences; for example, a person may be able to repeat a conversation
he has heard but not be able to reproduce a simple melody. There are
also motor memories that are not even stored in the conscious levels of
the brain (try to describe how you tie a shoelace, or where certain keys
are located on a typewriter).

What Can hbu Expectfrom Itbur Memory?1fen.Myths

3

In light of the complexity of your memory it should not be too
surprising that psychologists must measure several features when they
try to diagnose memory. For example, the most widely used memory
scale, the Wechsler Memory Scale, consists of seven different subtests
that are added together to give a summary score of memory functioning.
However, psychologists do not always agree on what features to measure: One analysis of 9 memory scales found that they measured a total
of 18 different memory features and no single scale measured more than
10 of the features.4
Thus, when we talk about improving "memory," we are not talking
about some thing that we are making stronger or bigger. We have seen
that there are two misconceptions involved in the myth that memory is a
thing. One is that memory is a thing (a tangible structure rather than an
abstract process) and the other is that memory is a thing (one memory
rather than many memories). This myth underlies several others.
MYTH 2: THERE IS A SECRET TO A GOOD MEMORY
One of the most common questions people ask about memory improvement is, "What is the secret of a good memory?" Some people who read
a book or take a course on memory training expect to find the secret of
memory improvement—the one key that will enable them to master
their memories completely. They hope that if they can just do that one
thing, they will never again forget anything they see or hear. This is an
unrealistic expectation.
Suppose you show to people in a carpentry class a tool that you call
a "hammer." You demonstrate the amazing things it can do that cannot
be done with the unaided hand. Someone says, "Yes, but how do you
saw a board with it?" You explain, "This tool isn't intended to saw boards.
There is another tool for sawing boards; it's called a saw. What a hammer
does, it does very powerfully, but it is not supposed to do everything."
Wouldn't it seem unrealistic of people to expect one tool to do all
carpentry jobs?
Similarly, there is no single tool that will handle all memory jobs;
there is no single "secret" to a good memory. Many techniques and
systems can serve as tools to build an effective memory and enable us to
do amazing things that cannot be done with the unaided memory. What
these memory tools do, they do very powerfully, but no tool does the
whole job by itself. You cannot build a complete memory with a single
memory tool any more than you can build a complete building with a
single carpentry tool.

4

YOUR MEMORY

Well, if there is no single memory method that will do everything, is
there a best one? This question is analogous to asking: Is there a best golf
club to use? The answer is: It varies with the circumstances. Many
circumstances determine what memory method is best to use to learn
material. For example:
1. Who is doing the learning? A chemistry professor and a beginning
chemistry student may use different methods to study a new chemistry book.
2. What is to be learned? Different methods may be used for learning
word lists, nonsense syllables, numbers, poems, speeches, and book
chapters.
3. How will remembering be measured? Preparing for a recognition task
may require a different method than preparing for a recall task.
'4. What kind of remembering is required? Rote rememering of facts
may require a different method than understanding and applying the
facts, and word-for-word memorizing may require a different method
than remembering ideas and concepts.
5. How long will remembering be required? Preparing to recall material
immediately after learning it may require a different method than
preparing to recall it a week later.
The practical implication of this consideration is that when a person
asks how he can improve his memory, he cannot expect a useful answer
until he makes his question more specific.3 What kind of material does
he want to remember? In what way? Under what circumstances? For
how long? There are methods and principles in this book that apply to
almost any kind of learning situation, but none applies to all situations.
Not only is there no single secret to mastering your memory but
most memory techniques are not even "secrets." Many memory-training
authors and lecturers give the impression that they are letting-you in on
their own secret memory techniques; however, the techniques are secret
only in the sense that many people are not aware of them. They are not
secret in the sense of being someone's own discovery or invention, or of
anyone having a patent on them or having the right to control who gets
to learn them or use them. One widely used memory system (discussed
in chapter 10) is about 2,500 years old, and many others are more than
300 years old (see chapters 11 and 12).
MYTH 3: THERE IS AN EASY WAY TO MEMORIZE
This myth goes hand in hand with myth 2. Many people not only hope to
find the one key to a good memory but expect that key to take the work

What Can hbu Expectfrom Itbur Memory?1fen.Myths

5

out of memorizing. In fact, that is why they are looking for the secret.
However, remembering is hard work, and memory techiques do not
necessarily make it easy, they just make it more effective. You still have
to work at it, but you get more out of your efforts. Some people talk
about memory "tricks" as if they were used in the place of "real"
memorization, but memory techniques do not replace the basic psychological principles of learning (such as those discussed in chapters 4 and
5), they use them (see chapter 7).
Some people believe that an intelligent person (one with a high IQ)
will naturally remember more easily than a person with a lower IQ. It is
true that some relationship exists between intelligence and memory
ability. If memory tests were given to two groups of people who had no
formal memory training, one group with high IQs and one group with low
IQs, most of the high-IQ people would score better on the test. One
reason for this is that intelligent people may be more likely to learn and
use effective memory techniques and methods on their own. (Research
has found that in school good students show more initiative in using
memory aids and learning strategies on their own than do poor students.)6 However, if a group of people with high IQs who had not learned
effective memory techniques were compared on a memory test with
people with average IQs who had learned effective memory techniques,
the average-IQ people would perform better. Remembering is a learned
skill.
Because remembering is a learned skill, improving memory is like
developing any other skill. You must work at it by learning the appropriate
techniques and practicing them. Suppose you want to be good at golf,
math, speed-reading, or anything else. Would you expect to learn just
one secret and have the skill mastered without further effort? No. You
would expect to learn principles and techniques, apply them, practice
them, and thus gradually develop the skill.
Unfortunately, many people do not think this way when it comes to
memory; they don't want to work at it. Some authors purposely appeal
to such people; for example, at least two memory-training books published in the 1980s have the word easy in the title. When such people find
out that improving memory takes effort, they often decide they can get
along well enough with their present memories. Plan to expend some
effort if you really want to benefit from the principles and systems
discussed in this book. (Research on learning strategies used by students
in school supports this idea: Improved study effectiveness and school
performance do not come easy, but depend on extensive training and
practice with study skills and learning strategies.)7
My experiences and observations suggest that laziness may play a
role in the inability of many adults to learn and remember as well as they

6

YOUR MEMORY

say they would like to. They are not used to investing the mental effort
necessary to learn as they had to do when they were in school. They
have gotten out of the habit of studying and are not willing to put in the
work it takes to remember effectively. Research has shown that number
of years of schooling and currently being in school were both positively
related to memory ability and use of memory techniques in middle-aged
women, and that adults who remain mentally active by maintaining
reading and studying habits are able to remember what they read better
than adults who do not stay mentally active.8
MYTH 4: SOME PEOPLE ARE STUCK WITH BAD MEMORIES
"I have a bad memory." Have you ever heard that statement? Have you
ever made it? In the first place, you do not even have a memory (see
myth 1). But even if we view memory as an ability or skill rather than a
thing, this myth still applies. If people mean that they have not learned
the memory skills that others have learned when they say "I have a bad
memory," then this statement would not be a myth. But what people
usually mean when they say they have a bad memory is "There is
something innately inferior about my memory ability." This statement
implies that nothing can be done to improve memory.
Remembering is a basic psychological process that is common to all
people, barring brain damage or severe mental or psychological disturbances. Some popular books on memory training even go so far as to
suggest that there is no such thing as a good memory or a bad memory:
There are only trained memories or untrained memories. Although there
may be some truth to this statement, it is not completely accurate.
There are probably some differences among people in innate memory
abilities; in this sense, there may be such a thing as a good memory and
a bad memory. However, the important point is that even if there are
such innate differences in memory, except for a few extreme cases these
innate differences are not nearly as important in the ability to remember
as are differences in learned memory skills.
The capacity of your memory is a function of the memory techniques
you use more than a function of any innate differences in memory ability.
Thus, improving your techniques improves your capacity. To illustrate
this point, let us compare a large cardboard box to a small 3" x 5" file
box. Which one has more "capacity" in terms of how much it can hold?
The cardboard box does. But suppose that one person writes notes on
3" x 5" cards and throws them in the cardboard box. A second person
writes his notes on 3" x 5" cards and files them alphabetically in the
small file box. Now, suppose each person later wants to find a specific
card. Which one will be able to find it more easily? Even though the

What Can hbu Expectfrom Itbur Memory?1fen.Myths

7

cardboard box can hold more cards, the file box actually has a larger
usable capacity because the cards are stored in such a way that they can
be found when needed. Similarly, the usable capacity of your memory
depends more on how you store information than it does on any innate
"capacity." (In fact, we will see in chapter 2 that your long-term memory
has a virtually unlimited capacity.) Unfortunately, most people use their
memories like the big cardboard box—they just throw the information in
and hope that they will be able to find it when they need it.
We saw in myth 1 that memory consists of a number of different
activities. This means that there is no single standard by which to judge
a "good" or "bad" memory. For example, a person who claims to have a
good memory may mean that he can do any one of a number of very
different things: Read a book and tell you everything that is in it; read a
paragraph and recite it word for word; tell you anything you want to
know about a given topic; recall many experiences from his early,
childhood; never forget anniversaries and appointments; or still be able
to do something, like play chess or speak a foreign language, that he has
not done for years.9 Many people would have a good memory for some
of these memory tasks and a bad memory for others.

MYTH 5: SOME PEOPLE ARE BLESSED WITH PHOTOGRAPHIC
MEMORIES
Wouldn't it be great to have a photographic memory that works like a
camera taking a snapshot? You could take a quick picture of a scene or a
page of print, and then describe it in complete detail at any time by
conjuring up the whole snapshot in your mind. Are there people who can
do this? Would it solve all your memory problems if you could do this?
Most psychologists do not believe in this popular notion of a photographic
memory, although there is a valid phenomenon called eidetic imagery that
is somewhat similar to this notion (see chapter 3).
As a teacher of memory improvement, I am concerned that the
popular notion of photographic memory leads people to believe that a
person who remembers well has some thing that others do not (see
myth 1). Whenever they see someone perform an amazing memory feat
they may throw it under the vague heading of "photographic memory"
because they do not know how else to explain it. After seeing a person
perform a fantastic memory feat, they shrug their shoulders and say,
"He has a photographic memory. I don't. That's why I could never do
that." The fact that this person has a photographic memory seems to
give them a convenient excuse for not being able to remember as well as
he can.

8

YOUR MEMORY

In a sense, the photographic memory myth is just the flip side of
the bad memory myth. Both lead people to emphasize innate differences
in memory ability rather than learned memory skills. There may possibly
be such a thing as photographic memory. I cannot completely discount
the possibility of its existence, because of rare examples of truly
exceptional memories like those described in chapter 3. However, when
people with amazing memories are tested in controlled research settings
it is usually found that what most people would attribute to photographic
memory is not something innate, but is merely the skillful application of
powerful memory techniques like those discussed in this book that
virtually anyone can use if he or she really wants to learn the techniques
and practice them.
I have done a demonstration several times that illustrates the
difference between a photographic memory and the application of powerful memory techniques. The demonstration consists of memorizing a
50-page magazine completely enough to be able to answer such questions
as: What is on page 32? On what page is the article about communication?
What is on the page opposite the picture of a tower? How many pictures
are on page 46? How many people are in the lower left picture on page
9, and what are they doing? Who wrote the article about tolerance?
What is the name of the main character in the story that begins on page
17, and what happened to her on page 19? I can answer almost any
question people may ask.
When I finish such a demonstration, someone almost always asks if
I have a photographic memory. I explain that I possess no such power,
but merely use the powerful mnemonic techniques explained in this book.
(Incidentally, my daughter performed this same demonstration when she
was thirteen years old.) There is nothing magical or effortless about my
memorizing a 50-page magazine so that I know what is on every page,
where it is on the page, who wrote everything and took all the photographs, and what is in every picture and article. It takes me about three
hours of study to memorize a magazine to that extent. The fact that I do
not have a photographic memory is shown by an occasional question that
I cannot answer, such as: How many of the people in the picture on page
21 are wearing glasses? Or, what is the third word on page 42? If I did
not consciously record such information when studying the magazine in
the first place, I cannot answer the question. On the other hand, if I had
a photographic memory I could merely conjure up in my mind a picture
of page 21 or page 42 and count how many people are wearing glasses,
or read the third word.

What Can hbu Expectfrom Itbur Memory?1fen.Myths

9

MYTH 6: SOME PEOPLE ARE TOO OLD/YOUNG TO IMPROVE
THEIR MEMORIES
You have probably heard the saying that you can't teach an old dog new
tricks. Actually, there is another saying that is probably more accurate,
but is not quite as well known: "The quickest way to become an old dog
is to quit learning new tricks." There has been a lot of recent research
interest in memory of the elderly. The number of published studies on
adult development and aging doubled from the mid-1970s to the mid1980s, reaching more than 1,000 articles a year; about two-thirds of that
research is on memory and there were at least 17 review articles
published on the subject in just the first half of the 1980s.10
Not too surprisingly, most research has shown that elderly adults
do not learn as efficiently or remember as well as young adults do.
However, research since the 1970s has been less negative in this respect
than earlier research, indicating in general that declines in mental abilities
occur later in life, and in fewer abilities, than was thought earlier.
Several significant considerations should be kept in mind regarding
the apparent memory decline in the elderly.
1. The term elderly generally refers to people in their mid-sixties
through their seventies (a few people in their eighties and a few in their
early sixties may be included); typically, they are compared with young
adults in their twenties. Not much memory research has been done on
adults in their thirties through fifties.
2. The amount of decline in memory performance with age is not
as great as is popularly believed; middle-aged and elderly people particularly often have exaggerated beliefs about their own mental inadequacies. Memory difficulties that occur in people of all ages may be emphasized in the elderly and attributed to age, which causes less confidence
in their abilities and more reporting of memory problems.
3. All memory skills do not decline equally; for example, visual and
spatial skills typically decline in most adults from their twenties through
their sixties, but verbal skills (such as memory for names, stories,
words, and, numbers) show very little, if any, decline.
4. A fourth consideration is suggested by a saying I once read: The
error of youth is to think that intelligence is a substitute for experience,
while the error of age is to think that experience is a substitute for
intelligence. Although neither intelligence nor experience may completely
substitute for the other, research indicates that a rich experience and
knowledge base helps many old adults perform some mental tasks at the
same or higher levels as young adults, even though they might not be

10

YOUR MEMORY

able to learn as quickly. Such "practical intelligence" can compensate for
many negative effects of aging.11
5. Researchers do not agree on the causes of a decline of memory
skills in old age. Most researchers do agree that there is probably no
single process that accounts for age differences in memory. Some of the
aging effects may be due to physiological causes (e.g., cell loss or central
nervous system dysfunction), but many of the effects are probably due
to psychological causes or other causes that may be amenable to change.
Examples of such causes suggested by research include motivation,
distractibility, response speed, motor skills, lazy mental habits, interest,
depression, health, education, and anxiety in research settings that are
new or involve time pressure. Notice that many of these factors have
nothing to do directly with mental ability: This has led some researchers
to make a distinction between competence and performance in remembering and other mental skills in the elderly.
Regardless of the reasons why many elderly adults remember less
than young adults, a more important question is whether the elderly can
improve their memory abilities. That is, for an elderly person the
question, "Can you remember as well as a twenty-year-old?" may not be
as important as the question, "Can you remember better than you do
now?" The answer to the latter question is yes! Much research has
shown that elderly people can learn and use the memory techniques in
this book to remember better, and my own experiences in teaching
elderly students also support this claim.12
At the other end of the age scale from the very old are the very
young. There has also been a great amount of research done on learning
and memory in young children.13 Most children younger than the early
teens would probably have a hard time reading and understanding a book
such as this one well enough to use the memory techniques effectively
on their own. However, a lot of research shows that with the help of
adults, children as young as ages seven or eight can use most of the
techniques and systems in this book; even preschool children can be
taught to use some of the techniques. I have taught memory courses to
children as young as age eight, and I taught the Beg system to two of my
own children when they were ages three and four (see chapter 11).
Experimental research has even been done on memory in infants,
although, obviously, they cannot be taught the techniques in this book.
MYTH 7: MEMORY, LIKE A MUSCLE, BENEFITS
FROM EXERCISE
Some popular books on memory training suggest that memory is like a
muscle. If you want a muscle to become stronger, you exercise it.

What Can hbu Expectfrom Itbur Memory? 1fen. Myths

11

Similarly, they say that if you want your memory to become stronger, all
you have to do is exercise it—practice memorizing. In fact, some people
believe that practice is one of the simple "keys" to memory improvement
(see myth 2): All you have to do is practice memorizing things and your
memory will become stronger. For example, in one book, a chapter
titled, "How to Cash in on Your Unused Brainpower," advocates "Isomental exercises" (patterned after isometric exercises for the body) as
"the secret of learning faster and remembering more." A chapter in
another book on learning is titled "Strengthening Your Mental Muscle,"
and tells us, "In one sense, the mind is like a set of muscles. And those
muscles never gain tone—usability—until they're properly exercised."
This mental exercise is proposed as the answer to the question of how
we can unlock the "other 80 or 90 percent" of our mental powers (see
myth 10).14
In the late 1800s, William James, often referred to as the father of
American psychology, tested whether he could improve his memory by
exercising it. He memorized some of Victor Hugo's works, and then
practiced memorizing Milton for 38 days. After this practice, he memorized more from Hugo, and found that he actually memorized a bit slower
than he had previously; he reported similar results for several other
people who tried the same task. Similarly, twelve-year-old girls practiced
memorizing poetry, scientific formulas, and geographical distances for 30
minutes a day, 4 days a week, for 6 weeks. The practice did not result in
any improvement in their ability to memorize. A more recent study found
that after practicing several hours a week for 20 months, a college
student was able to increase his short-term memory span for digits from
7 to 80 digits. However, he showed no increased ability in other kinds of
memory tasks, including short-term memory for letters or words: He
improved his memory for digits because he had learned to apply a
mnemonic technique to the digits, not because of any actual increase in
the capacity of his short-term memory.15
There is no substantial evidence that practice alone makes a significant difference in improving memory. It is true that practicing memorizing can help improve memory, but what you do during practice is more
important than the amount of practice. One classic study (discussed in
chapter 6) found that 3 hours of practicing memorizing did not improve
long-term memory, but that 3 hours of practicing using certain techniques did improve long-term memory.
The memory-muscle myth has been expressed in the field of
education as mental discipline. The "doctrine of formal discipline" says
that the mind can be strengthened through exercise. This notion was
prevalent in education around the turn of the century, and was used as
an argument for teaching subjects such as Greek and Latin in school. It

12

YOUR MEMORY

was argued that the study of such subjects exercised and disciplined the
mind, so that the student would do better in his other subjects, and it
was observed that students who studied these difficult subjects did tend
to do better in their other school subjects. However, studies done on
thousands of high school students during the first half of this century
found that the reason students who studied Greek, for example, did
better in school than students who did not study Greek was that it was
the brighter students who took Greek. It was not the Greek that made
them brighter. Some educators still adhere to the concept of mental
discipline, even though it is not supported by research evidence.16
MYTH 8: A TRAINED MEMORY NEVER FORGETS
People who know that I have written a book and teach a course on
memory improvement are often surprised when theyfindout that I have
forgotten something. (When I do not remember something I try to say
"I don't know" instead of "I don't remember"; this way, most people do
not make the connection and accuse me of being a charlatan for forgetting.) One well-known memory expert and performer similarly has noted
that people sometimes come up to him and ask, for example, "Did you
read the newspaper this morning?" When he says yes, they ask, "Well,
what is on page 6, line 4?" and he cannot tell them. Or after speaking
with him for a few minutes, they ask him to repeat the conversation
word for word, and he cannot do it. Why not? Because he did not read
the newspaper for the purpose of memorizing it, and he did not engage
in conversation for the purpose of memorizing it 17
Many people do not realize that a person who has a trained memory
does not necessarily remember everything. As I mentioned in myth 2,
they expect that once they learn the secret of a good memory, they will
never again forget anything. But the advantage of a well-trained memory
is that you can remember what you want to remember, and you don't
necessarily want to remember everything. Realistically, even with a
trained memory, you are still likely to forget even some of the things you
want to remember. You just won't forget as much as most people do, or
as much as you used to forget.
Actually, there is some truth in the contention that we never really
"forget" anything in the sense that it is recorded in our brains—for
untrained as well as trained memories. However, when we talk about
"remembering," our practical interest is usually in getting the information
out of our brains when we want it. It doesn't do us much good to know
that the information we need is in there someplace if we cannot get it out
at will. Memory training helps you store information in your brain in such

What Can hbu Expectfrom Itbur Memory?1fen.Myths

13

a way that you are more likely to be able to find it and get it out when
you want it (as during the exam or the speech rather than just after you
have finished).
MYTH 9: REMEMBERING TOO MUCH CAN CLUTTER YOUR
MIND
People sometimes think of this myth when they see someone who gives
memory demonstrations—feats that involve memorizing vast amounts of
information that may or may not be useful. They think that the person's
mind will get cluttered with useless information, which will get in the
way of remembering what he needs to remember.
Actually, to say that remembering too much can clutter your mind
is an ironic memory myth, because most people's minds are already
cluttered—and they don't remember enough! Your ability to remember
something depends less on how much material you have stored in your
memory than it does on how you learned it (see "organization" in chapter
4). Recall the example in myth 4 of the large unorganized cardboard box
and the small organizedfilebox. The person with the small organized file
box can find needed information better than the person with the large
unorganized box. But it is the disorganization, not the amount of material
in the large box, that hinders memory. A large organized file box would
be very efficient, and a small file box would be very inefficient if the
material werefiledhaphazardly.
In some ways, the more you learn about something the more it may
actually help memory. We will see in chapter 4 that the more you learn
about a particular topic the easier it is to learn new things about that
topic. We will also see in later chapters that most mnemonic systems
actually add to the amount you need to remember, but they do so in a way
that increases your memory ability.
Another aspect of the "cluttered mind" myth can be illustrated by
pursuing thefile-boxanalogy a little further. Suppose you just keep
throwing material into the cardboard box. Soon it will fill up. Filing any
more material would mean stuffing it in, and something would have to fall
out of the other end of the box to make room for it. This is how some
people view the memory that has stored vast amounts of material. Not
only will the material clutter the memory, but it will take up valuable
storage space that you may want to use later for more important
information. This is not completely valid, because the storage capacity
of your memory is virtually unlimited (see chapter 2). Thus, remembering too much does not necessarily either clutter your mind orfillup your
memory.

14

YOUR MEMORY

MYTH 10: PEOPLE ONLY USE 10 PERCENT OF THEIR MENTAL
POTENTIAL
The claim is often made that we use only about 10 percent of our
potential brainpower in remembering and in other mental activities. Here
are just three examples from published sources: "Most of us, psychologists say, don't use more than 10 percent of our native ability to
remember." "You've probably heard that we use only 10 or 20 percent
of our mental powers. How can that be? Is there some secret to unlocking
the other 80 to 90 percent?" "If you're like most people, you're using
only about 10 percent of your brainpower."18
Although the claimed amount of potential used is generally around
10 percent, some authors have claimed even smaller percentages. One
author observed that it used to be an oft-quoted statistic that we use
only 10 percent of our potential brainpower, but that the more psychologists have learned in the past ten years, the less likely they are to dare
to attempt to quantify our brain potential. So far, so good, but then he
went on to draw the following amazing conclusion: "The only consistent
conclusion is that the proportion of our potential brainpower is probably
nearer 4 percent than 10 percent. Most of us, then, appear to let 96
percent of our mental potential lie unused." Why stop at 4 percent?
Another author wrote that "the commonly heard statement that on the
average we use only 1 percent of our brain may well be wrong, because
it now seems that we use even less than 1 percent."19
Whether the claimed percentage of used brainpower is 1 percent or
10 percent, the inference usually drawn from this claim is that it is easy
to make miraculous improvements in mental ability because they require
very small increases in brain usage. Fbr example, if you are operating at
only 10 percent of your potential you need to use only 2 percent of the
remaining potential, and you have increased your performance by 20
percent (200 percent for the 1-percent claim). One book observed that
the average IQ is 100, the genius level is 160, and the average human
being probably uses 4 percent of his potential brainpower, and then
asked, "If that average human could learn to use not 4 percent of his
brain but a still minimal 7 percent of his brain, could he attain genius
level?" The implication, of course, is that a 75-percent improvement
(from 4 percent to 7 percent) corresponds with a 75-percent improvement in IQ—from 100 to 175.20
Another book gives the illusion of scientific precision by working out
this reasoning in a mathematical formula using a "Mental Performance
Ratio (MPR), the percentage of your total mental capacity that you are
putting to use." Suppose a person who uses the typical 10 percent of his
brainpower has an IQ of 140; his "Learning Power" would be 14.0

What Can hbu Expectfrom Itbur Memory?1fen.Myths

15

(140 IQ x .10 MPR). Now suppose a second person with an IQ of 120
(about the average of most college graduates) could increase the use of
his brainpower by only one-fifth (from 10 percent to 12 percent); his
Learning Power would now be higher than that of the person with the IQ
of 140 (120 IQ X .12 MPR = 14.4 Learning Power).21
What is wrong with the 10-percent claim and the reasoning that
underlies the complex calculations above? The main problem is that none
of these authors (or any others I have ever read) presents any evidence
to support the 10-percent figure. In fact, I have never found any actual
research evidence anywhere for the 10-percent claim, nor have I ever
seen the claim made by any brain researchers (and I probably have used
more than 10 percent of my potential searching ability looking for such
evidence). I have even challenged my memory students, many of whom
have heard the 10-percent claim, to find evidence for me, and no one has
yet been able to do so—even for extra credit!
It is possible that there may be some research evidence to support
the 10-percent claim, but I doubt it for several reasons. First, I doubt
that researchers could agree on a definition of what "mental potential"
or "potential brainpower" really means. Second, even if researchers
could define mental potential, I doubt that they could measure it to
determine what constitutes a person's total potential. Third, even if they
could define and measure mental potential, I doubt that researchers
could define what it means to "use" our mental potential, and that there
would be any way to measure what percentage of the total we use.
My own belief is that we do have more potential mental ability than
we use. That is why I wrote this book: to help you come closer to
achieving the full potential of your learning and memory abilities. However, I do not think we can quantify how much our potential is, or
determine whether the percentage of potential that we use is 1 percent,
10 percent, 50 percent, or 99 percent.

Meet Your Memory
What Is It?

P

eople can learn an amazing number of different things. We can learn
to walk, dance, and swim. We can learn to type, repair watches, and
program computers. We can learn to drive cars, ride bikes, and fly
airplanes. We can learn languages, chemical formulas, and mathematical
proofs. We can learn to read road maps, make out income tax returns,
and balance checkbooks. The list of things we can learn to do could be
continued almost indefinitely.
Of course, all this learning would be useless if we could not
remember. Without memory we would have to respond to every situation
as if we had never experienced it. The value of memory is also shown by
the fact that we reason and make judgments with remembered facts. In
addition, we are able to deal with time, relating the present to the past
and making predictions about the future, because of what is stored in
our memories. Even our own self-perceptions depend on our memories
of our past.
The uses and the capacity of the human memory are indeed
amazing. You can store billions of items of information in your memory.
Your two-pound brain can store more than today's most advanced
computers.1 But people also forget. We forget things we would like to
remember. We forget names, anniversaries, birthdays, and appoint16

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

17

ments. We forget what we learned for an exam in school (usually within
a short time after the exam, and sometimes before the exam).
What is your memory? How does your memory work? Chapters 2
and 3 try to answer these two closely related questions. The aspects of
memory that I have selected to discuss in these two chapters are those
that will give you an understanding of your memory sufficient to make
the rest of this book meaningful. Some understanding of the theories
underlying memory techniques can help in using the techniques more
effectively and also in being motivated to use them.2 Thus, chapters 2
and 3 provide a basic foundation for understanding and using the principles, methods, and systems discussed in the rest of this book. For the
reader who wants a more complete understanding of the nature of
memory, more comprehensive (and more technical) coverage is given in
a number of recent memory textbooks in which you can read more about
most of the topics in chapters 2 and 3, plus additional topics.3

WHAT ARE THE STAGES AND PROCESSES OF MEMORY?
Remembering is generally viewed as consisting of three stages:
1. Acquisition or encoding is learning the material in thefirstplace.
2. Storage is keeping the material until it is needed.
3. Retrieval is finding the material and getting it back out when it is
needed.
To help remember these three stages, we can refer to them as the
"Three Rs of Remembering": Recording (acquisition), Retaining (storage), and Retrieving (retrieval). Another way to remember the three
stages of memory is by referring to the "Three Fs of Forgetting" (or,
more accurately, the three Fs of not forgetting). Corresponding with
Recording, Retaining, and Retrieving are, respectively, Fixating, Filing,
and Finding.
The three stages of memory can be illustrated by comparing the
memory to a file cabinet. You first type the desired information on a
piece of paper (Recording). Then you put it in afilecabinet drawer under
the appropriate heading (Retaining). Later you go to thefilecabinet, find
the information, and get it back out (Retrieving).
Sometimes when a person cannot locate what he wants in a file
cabinet it may be because the information was never recorded; sometimes it may be because the recorded information was never put in the
cabinet; but often it is because the information was not put in the cabinet

18

YOUR MEMORY

in such a way as to be easy to find. Suppose a person using the file
cabinet throws letters and documents haphazardly into the drawers. A
few months later he goes to the cabinet to retrieve a specific document.
He would likely have a problem getting it. Why? Because it was not
recorded? No, the document had been typed. Because it was not
retained? No, the document had been put in the cabinet. How the
document was stored is the problem.
Similarly, most problems in remembering come at the retrieval
stage rather than the storage stage. We are all very aware that memory
is limited more in getting things out than in getting them in. More can be
stored in memory than can be retrieved. There is not much we can do to
improve retrieval directly, but retrieval is a function of how the material
is recorded and retained. Therefore, improved methods of recording and
retaining will improve retrieval, both from a file cabinet and from your
memory. The principles and methods discussed in this book will help you
record and retain information in such a way as to be able to retrieve it
more effectively;
It is usefUl to distinguish between material in memory that is
accessible and material that is available. This distinction can be illustrated
by the boy who asks his father, "Dad, is something lost when you know
where it is?" His father replies, "No, son." Clearly relieved, the boy
responds, "Good, your car keys are at the bottom of the well." The keys
were available but they were not accessible. Similarly, material that is
misplaced in a file cabinet is available because it is stored, but it is not
accessible because it cannot be retrieved. However, if the material is not
even in the file cabinet then it is neither accessible nor available.
Likewise, material that is recorded and retained in your memory may
not be accessible even if it is available; you know it is in there somewhere,
but you just cannot find it. In this situation, the answer to the boy's
question may be, "Yes, something can be lost even when you know
where it is."
In addition to the three stages of memory there appear to be at
least two different processes involved in memory—short-term memory
(also called primary memory and working memory) and long-term memory
(also called secondary memory). The distinction between short-term
memory and long-term memory is more than just a semantic distinction
between remembering for a short time and remembering for a long time.
Most psychologists view short-term memory and long-term memory as
being two separate storage mechanisms that differ in several ways,
although some psychologists have suggested that they are not really
different mechanisms but merely different manifestations of the same
mechanism (such as different levels of processing). I will avoid this

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

19

theoretical issue and merely follow the conventional approach of viewing
them as two different processes.
WHAT IS SHORT-TERM MEMORY?
Short-term memory refers to how many items can be perceived at one
time—how much a person can consciously pay attention to at once. It is
similar to the older concept of "attention span." Short-term memory has
a rapid forgetting rate. Information stored in short-term memory.is
forgotten in less than 30 seconds, and sometimes the forgetting rate can
be much faster. (People who don't expect a memory test can rarely
recall three consonants correctly after only 2 seconds of distraction.)4
The usual way of combating this rapid forgetting rate is rehearsal, which
consists of repeating the information over and over again. Rehearsing
can serve two functions: It can keep the information in short-term
memory, and it can help you transfer the information into long-term
memory by giving you time to code it. These two functions apply to
remembering pictures and images (mental pictures) as well as to remembering verbal material.5
The rapid forgetting rate of short-term memory is shown in an
experience that may be familiar to you. Have you ever looked up a
telephone number and forgotten it before you got to the phone to dial it?
Or perhaps you remembered it (by rehearsing it) long enough to dial it,
but you received a busy signal. A few seconds or a few minutes later,
you had to look up the number again to dial it. The ease with which
short-term memory can be disrupted is shown if someone asks you a
question such as, "What time is it?" right after you look up a number.
You answer the question, and find you have to go back to the phone
book. One study found that this disruption can be caused just by an
operator saying, "Have a nice day," right after telling you a phone
number.6
Besides having a rapid forgetting rate and being easily disrupted,
short-term memory also has a limited capacity, around seven items for
most people. (This capacity has been found to be about the same for
elderly adults as for young adults, and for people in oriental cultures as
for people in western cultures.)7 You can demonstrate the limited capacity
of short-term memory by having someone read to you a list of digits one
at a time at the rate of about one digit per second. Then you repeat
them. Start with a list of 4 digits (for example, 8293). Next try a list of 5
digits (for example, 27136). Add 1 digit each time, building up to a list of
12 digits (for example, 382749562860).
Most peoplefindthat when they get above seven digits they cannot

20

YOUR MEMORY

remember all of them long enough to repeat them. It seems as if they
must lose the first few digits to "make room" for the last few. A few
people can remember 10 or 11 digits, but very few people can remember
more than 11 digits. This demonstration can also be used to illustrate
the rapid forgetting rate of short-term memory. Instead of repeating the
digits as soon as they are read to you, wait for 5 to 10 seconds to repeat
them. If you do not rehearse the digits during this delay, you will find
that the number of digits you can remember decreases considerably.
Chunking
We can increase the limited capacity of short-term memory by a process
that is referred to as "chunking." Chunking consists of grouping separate
bits of information into larger chunks. For example, a person can
remember the following eight letters, c-o-m-p-l-e-t-e, by chunking them
into one word, complete. Numbers are also easier to remember if they
are grouped into chunks of two or three. A number such as
376315374264 can be remembered as 12 separate digits, but it is easier
to remember as four chunks of 3 digits each—376-315-374-264. Similarly, a phone number can be remembered better as 601-394-1217 than
as 6013941217, and a social security number of 513-63-2748 is easier to
remember than 513632748. Of course, chunking takes time; if the items
are presented too fast (for example, 1 digit per second) then chunking is
less effective than if they are presented more slowly (for example, 1 digit
every 5 seconds).
Short-term memory can be compared to a purse that can hold seven
coins. If the coins are pennies, then the capacity of the purse is only 7
cents. But if the coins are nickles (each representing a "chunk" of 5
pennies), then the capacity is 35 cents. If they are dimes, the capacity is
increased to 70 cents. Similarly, a short-term memory may be able to
hold only about seven items, but we can increase the amount of information contained in these items by grouping the separate bits of information
into larger chunks. For example, the capacity of short-term memory is
about 8.0 for separate digits, about 7.3 for consonants, about 5.8 for
concrete nouns, and about 1.8 for 6-word sentences; assuming that the
nouns contain an average of 4 letters each, we increase the capacity from
7.3 letters using only consonants, to about 23 letters using concrete
nouns, and to more than 40 letters using sentences.8
Chunking is also illustrated by an interesting phenomenon in chess.
An excellent chess player can look for 5 seconds at the board of a chess
game in progress and then look away and recall the position of every
piece. This suggests that chess masters have unusual memories. However, if the chess pieces are placed randomly on the board, rather than

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

21

in the positions one would find in an ongoing game, the chess master
cannot remember the positions of any more pieces than can the beginning
chess player. What makes the difference? One possible explanation is
that the chess master makes use of his vast chess experience to
recognize familiar visual patterns and interrelations among the pieces.
Rather than remembering the position of each separate piece, he remembers groups (chunks) of pieces. He can only remember about seven
chunks, but each of his chunks consists of several pieces.9
What Good Is Short-term Memory?
Because short-term memory has such a limited capacity and items in it
are forgotten so rapidly, you might wonder why such a process is part of
our memory system at all. Short-term memory has several uses.
1. The rapid forgetting in short-term memory is not necessarily
undesirable. Imagine how cluttered and jumbled your mind would be if
you were consciously aware of every little bit of information your mind
recorded. It would be almost impossible to concentrate on one thing or
to select useful information. For example, add the following numbers
mentally: 1,8,4,6,3,5. In doing this problem, something like the following
probably went through your mind: "1 plus 8 is 9, plus 4 is 13, plus 6 is
19, plus 3 is 22, plus 5 is .27." Of all the numbers that went through your
mind the only one that is necessary to remember for any length of time
is 27. All the others needed to be remembered only long enough to use
them. Imagine how difficult it would be to keep track of your addition if
each subtotal did not disappear as soon as you reached the next one.
Thus, short-term memory can serve as a sort of temporary scratch
pad, allowing us to retain intermediate results while we think and solve
problems. Short-term memory is used not only in numerical problems
but also in the whole range of complex problems we face regularly.10
When a chess master is planning the next move, for example, he or she
develops in short-term memory a temporary, imaginary picture of critical
parts of the chessboard as they will appear after several future moves
and countermoves. And think about how hard it would be for waiters or
waitresses to keep track of what they were doing if they did not forget
each order as soon as it had been filled.
2. Short-term memory helps us maintain our current picture of the
world around us—indicating what objects are out there and where they
are located. By constructing and maintaining these worldframes,shortterm memory keeps our visual perceptions stable. Our process of visual
perception actually skitters here and there about a scene, taking about
five retinal images, or "snapshots," per second. Yet we do not discard an

40 Y O U R M E M O R Y

old image every fifth of a second and construct a new scene of our
surroundings. Rather, we integrate information from all the "snapshots"
into one sustained image, or model, of the scene around us. As we notice
small changes, we update this model, deleting old objects, adding new
ones, and changing the relative location of objects. Short-term memory
enables us to do this.
3. Short-term memory holds whatever goals or plans we are
following at the moment. By keeping our intentions in active memory,
we are able to guide our behavior toward those goals.
4. Short-term memory keeps track of the topics and referents that
have been recently mentioned in conversation. If I mention my friend
John, I can later refer to him as "he" or "my friend" and you will know
who I am talking about; the idea of John is still in your active memory:
You can figure out that I mean John and not Scott or David.
After noting the above uses of short-term memory, a recent
psychology textbook made the following interesting observation:
Perhaps because short-term memories are so very useful, nearly every computer
system for storing information is designed with a kind of short-term memory,
located within its central processing unit (CPU). The CPU of a computer system
receives data, stores it in memory, retrieves it, performs a variety of calculations,
and either stores the result, displays it on a screen, or prints it These functions
are remarkably similar to the functions of our short-term memory. In fact, the
parallels are so close that many cognitive psychologists view the computer's
CPU as a useful metaphorical model of human short-term memory.11

WHAT IS LONG-TERM MEMORY?
Long-term memory is what most people mean when they talk about
memory, and what most memory-improvement techniques are aimed at
improving. Many psychologists believe that long-term memory is composed of several different types. For example, one common view divides
long-term memory into three types.
1. Procedural memory involves remembering how to do something
(skills such as typing or solving a quadratic equation).
2. Semantic memory involves remembering factual information (such as
math equations or word meanings) with no connection to time or
place; we don't remember when or where we learned the information.

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

23

3. Episodic memory involves remembering personal events (such as
your first date or where you learned a particular equation).12
Long-term memory differs from short-term memory in several
ways:
1. The nerve changes that take place in the brain may be different for
short-term memory and long-term memory.
2. Short-term memory is an active, ongoing process that is easily
disrupted by other activities; long-term memory is not as easily
disrupted.
3. Short-term memory has a limited capacity; the capacity of long-term
memory is virtually unlimited.
4. Retrieval from short-term memory is an automatic, dumping-out
process; retrieval problems come in long-term memory.
5. Some drugs and diseases can affect short-term memory without
affecting long-term memory, and vice versa.
There is evidence that more is stored in our memories, and that
memories are more permanently recorded in our brains, than we might
assume. Long-term memory is relatively permanent, and has a virtually
unlimited capacity. When you really try to remember a specific event,
you sometimes find that you can recall more than you thought possible.
On repeated recall attempts, people can recall more material than they
did on the first recall attempt, without having the material presented
again. Recall of "forgotten" information (such as early childhood experiences) under drugs or hypnosis also illustrates the large capacity and
permanent nature of long-term memory.
Electrical stimulation of the brain provides some of the most striking
evidence for the large capacity and relatively permanent nature of longterm memory. When surgeons prepare patients for brain surgery, they
may touch parts of the brain with an electric probe. The patient is
conscious and can report what he experiences as different parts of the
brain are electrically stimulated. Under such conditions, patients have
reported reliving a previous event, complete with all the sensations
experienced at that earlier time. These memories are much more vivid
than ordinary memories, as if the electric probe started a film strip or a
tape recording on which the details of the event were registered. One
man saw himself in his childhood home laughing and talking with his
cousins. A woman reported that she heard a song playing that she had
not heard since her youth; and she believed that there was a phonograph
in the room playing the song. These people are not just reminded of the

24

YOUR MEMORY

event: Their memory of the event seems very real, even though they
know that they are on the operating table; it is as if they are experiencing
a double-consciousness. The experience stops when the probe is removed, and may be repeated if the probe is replaced.13
Evidence that nerve changes in the brain may be different for shortterm memory and long-term memory is provided by brain-damaged
patients. One patient (K. E) had a defective short-term memory with a
normal long-term memory. His retention of events in everyday life was
not impaired, indicating that his long-term learning ability was normal.
However, K. F. could not repeat number sequences of more than two
digits. Another patient (H. M.) could not form new long-term memory
traces, although his short-term memory and his existing long-term
memory appeared to be normal. He performed well on tests involving
knowledge acquired before his brain damage, and had no apparent
personality changes as a result of the brain damage. However, he could
not remember any new information for very long. H. M. read the same
magazines over and over and worked the same jigsaw puzzles without
realizing he had seen them before. As long as information was held in
short-term memory he behaved normally, but the contents of his shortterm memory were lost when his attention was distracted. The connecting link between short-term memory and long-term memory seemed to
have been broken; H. M. could not transfer information from short-term
memory into long-term memory.14
Relationship of Long-term Memory to Short-term Memory
Earlier I compared memory to a file cabinet. We can now refine the
analogy. Short-term memory is like the in-basket on an office desk.
Long-term memory is like the large file cabinets in an office. The inbasket has a limited capacity; it can hold only so much information before
it must be emptied to make room for more. Some of what is removed is
thrown away, and some is put into the file cabinets; however, nothing is
put into thefilecabinets without first sorting through the in-basket.
Similarly, information goes through short-term memory to reach
long-term memory. This makes short-term memory the bottleneck in
storing information. Not only does short-term memory have a limited
capacity but information in short-term memory must be coded in some
way to be transferred into long-term memory. This coding takes time,
which limits the amount of information that can be sent into long-term
memory in a given period. Getting information out of short-term memory
is not too hard; everything is dumped out at once. Problems arise in
retrieving information from long-term memory. Some kind of systematic

25

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

search is necessary. We have seen that the information will be hard to
find if it is not stored in some orderly way. The principles and methods
discussed in later chapters provide ways to code and categorize information so that it can be efficiently transferred from short-term memory
to long-term memory.
A workroom analogy can be used to shed light on the relationship
between long-term memory and short-term memory.15 Suppose a carpenter is building a cabinet. All his materials are neatly organized on
shelves around the walls of his workroom. He gets the materials that he
is currently using (tools, boards ready to put in place, etc.) from the
shelves and places them on the workbench, leaving space on the bench
to work. When the bench gets too messy, he may stack material in piles
so that he can get more on the bench. If the number of stacks gets too
large, some may fall off, or the carpenter may put some of the materials
on a shelf.
We can think of the shelves as long-term memory (holding the large
amount of material available for the carpenter to use), and of the bench
as short-term memory (divided into the work space and a limited-capacity
storage area). The carpenter's operations are like the work that goes on
in short-term memory. Stacking things to make more space and get
more material on the workbench is like chunking. Things that fall off the
bench are like items forgotten from short-term memory, and getting
things from the shelves and putting them back is like transferring
information from and to long-term memory. Materials that the carpenter
may need that are not on the shelves are like information that is
unavailable; materials on the shelves that the carpenter cannot locate are
like information that is inaccessible.
The following diagram summarizes many of the points discussed so
far in this chapter. It pictorially illustrates the relationship between shortterm memory and long-term memory.
"forgotten"

rehearsed

coded

failure

1
information

Short-term
Memory

• «

Si

i retrii
immei

Long-term
Memory

26

YOUR MEMORY

WHAT ARE THE MEASURES OF MEMORY?
How we measure memory affects our definition of what memory is.
There are three main ways to measure how much a person remembers,
and each can give a different picture of memory. We can ask him to tell
us everything he remembers; we can ask him to pick out the items he
remembers from a group of items; or we can see how easily he learns
the material a second time. These three approaches are referred to,
respectively, as recall, recognition, and relearning.16
Recall
Most people are thinking of recall when they talk about remembering.
Recall requires producing information by searching the memory for it In
school, recall is the task you are given in test questions such as: "Name
the first five presidents of the United States," or "Name the capital of
Argentina," or "Recite the Gettysburg Address." When most people say
they do not remember something, what they mean is that they do not
recall it
A person who is unable to recall something may be able to recall it
if he is given some cues. This is called aided recall. For example, we will
see in chapter 7 that giving people the first letters of words they have
learned improves their recall of the words. If you are unable to recall the
names of thefirstfivepresidents, try again, using thefirstletters of the
last names of the presidents as cues: W, A, J, M, M.
There are several different methods that psychologists use to study
recall. In the free-recall method a person is presented a list of words one
at a time and required to learn the list so that he can recall as many
words as possible in any order. Examples of free recall in everyday life
are remembering the items on a shopping list and remembering what
movies are playing in town. In the serial learning method the person is
presented a list of words one at a time and is required to learn the list so
that he can recall the words in the same order they were presented.
Serial learning differs from free recall in that the order of recall is
important, and each word serves as the cue for the next word. Examples
of serial learning in everyday life are learning the alphabet and learning a
speech. A third method for studying recall is the paired-associate method.
In this method pairs of words are shown, and the person is required to
associate them so that when he is given the first word he will recall the
second word. Examples of paired-associate learning in everyday life are
learning the capitals of states and learning a foreign language vocabulary.
The Link system discussed in chapter 9 is especially appropriate for
improving memory in serial learning tasks. The systems discussed in

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

27

chapters 10, 11, and 12 also involve paired-associate learning. All the
.systems can help in free-recall tasks.
Recognition
A person may be unable to recall something even when given cues, but
may still show evidence of remembering if recognition is used as the
measure of memory. When we recognize something, we acknowledge
that it is familiar, that we have met it before (the word recognition means
literally "to know again"). In recognition the test is, "Is this the item?";
in recall the test is, "What is the item?" An example of a recognition task
in school is a multiple-choice question such as: Which of the following is
the capital of Argentina? (a) Lima (b) Rio de Janeiro (c) Santiago (d)
Buenos Aires.
Recognition is usually easier than recall because we do not have to
search for the information; it is given to us and all we have to do is be
able to identify it as something we learned. The high sensitivity of
recognition as a measure of memory was demonstrated by showing
people 600 pairs of items (words, sentences, pictures). Later the people
were shown some of these items paired with new items and were asked
to indicate which member of the pair was the one they had seen
previously. The average correct recognition score was about 88 percent
for sentences, 90 percent for words, and 98 percent for pictures.
Although most elderly adults do not perform as well as most young adults
in free-recall tasks, they do perform as well in recognition or cued-recall
tasks.17
Long after people can no longer recall most of the students in their
high school graduating class, they can still recognize their yearbook
pictures and names from sets of pictures and names.18 Most people
remember other people's faces better than their names. (Do you often
hear people say, "Your name is familiar but I don't remember your
face"?) One reason is that remembering a face is usually a recognition
task and remembering a name is usually a recall task. Other possible
reasons why we remember faces better than names are discussed in
chapter 13.
Relearning
A person may be unable to recall something, to recall it with cues, or
even to recognize it, but may still show evidence of remembering by the
third measure—relearning or savings.19 Suppose you measure how long
it takes you to learn something the first time. Later you measure how

28

YOUR MEMORY

long it takes you to learn it again. If you learn it faster the second time
(there is a savings in learning time), that is evidence that you still have
some memory of the material. For example, college professors showed
evidence of memory for former students' names when the measure of
relearning was used but not when picture-cued recall was used.20
Relearning may be illustrated by the common experience of a person
who studies a foreign language that he learned many years ago. He may
not be able to recall any of it. He may recognize very little. But when he
starts studying it, he may find that it comes back to him rather easily.
Similarly, you may not be able to recite the Gettysburg Address, or the
Declaration of Independence, or something else that you learned in
school, but you could probably relearn them faster than someone who
has never seen them before could learn them.
An interesting study that a psychologist conducted on his own son
shows that relearning is a very sensitive measure of memory, and also
that relearning may show evidence of memory even when the material
was not fully learned originally. The psychologist read passages of Greek
to his son from the age offifteenmonths to three years. He later tested
the boy for retention at ages eight, fourteen, and eighteen by having him
memorize the original passages and some comparable new passages. At
age eight it took the boy 27 percent fewer trials to memorize the original
passages than the new passages, suggesting a considerable savings in
relearning effort as a result of. retention of the earlier learning. The
methods of recall and recognition would likely have shown no evidence of
remembering. The savings decreased from 27 percent at age eight, to 8
percent at age fourteen, and to only 1 percent at age eighteen.21
Thus, it is not accurate to say that you do not remember something
merely because you do not recall it. Information that is available in
memory may be inaccessible by recall but may be accessible by recognition or relearning. Recognition is generally a more sensitive measure of
memory than is recall in the sense of detecting retention where recall
does not. (Surprisingly, however, some studies have found conditions in
which some words can be recalled after Mure to recognize them.)22
Likewise, relearning is more sensitive than recognition. If you can
recognize something or can relearn it faster than you learned it the first
time, you have some memory of it even though you cannot recall it. This
is one answer to the person who says that it does not do any good for
him to read something because he cannot "remember" (recall) it anyway.
Similarly, students who criticize school exams because they forget
most of what they learn soon after the exam are basing their complaint
solely on recall. It is interesting to note that some of these same students
may complain that a certain course is a waste of time because they have

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

29

had the same material in another course. This suggests that they have
not forgotten the material because they can still recognize it.
Of course, practically speaking, we are more concerned with recall
than with recognition or relearning because most of us have the greatest
problem with recall. One way in which the mnemonic systems discussed
in chapters 9 through 12 help recall is to change recall to aided recall by
providing you with cues that you can use to cue yourself.
With respect to measuring memory, a method that is frequently
used to study memory should be noted. One of the problems in studying
memory is that people have different degrees of familiarity with different
words. Thus, if one person learns a list of words faster than another
person, it might be because he has seen those words more often, lb
control for this difference in familiarity, much research on learning has
used nonsense syllables that are unfamiliar to virtually everyone who
participates in the study. A nonsense syllable is a meaningless threeletter "word" such as CEJ, ZUL, or ZIB.
WHAT IS THE TIP-OF-THE-TONGUE PHENOMENON?
Have you ever had the experience of almost being able to recall a specific
word but not quite being able to get it? You are sure you know the word
but are unable to recall it. You may have had this experience when trying
to recall a name. Perhaps you could tell what letter the name started
with, what it rhymed with, or maybe even how many syllables it had, but
could not quite get the name itself. It is from such a situation that we get
the expression, "It's on the tip of my tongue," and most people have had
this kind of experience.23
I had this experience when trying to recall the last name of a person
I knew many years ago. I could picture him in my mind but couldn't think
of his name. In searching my mind for the name I thought of Scotland
and of hillbillies. It seemed that the name had two syllables and was
rather short. Finally it came to me. The name was "McCoy." The
associations were obvious: The Scottish association camefromthe "Mc"
prefix (McDuff, McDougall, etc.); the hillbilly association came from an
old television show about hillbillies—"The Real McCoys."
Psychologists have tried to study this interesting, widespread phenomenon.24 The first experimental studies on the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon (and the closely related feeling-of-knowing phenomenon) were
published in the mid-1960s, although it had been observed and analyzed
much earlier. Several studies published during the 1970s duplicated the
initial findings and investigated possible theoretical explanations and
implications of the phenomenon.

30

YOUR MEMORY

One way to study the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon has been to
read to people definitions of words that are infrequently used (for
example, sextant, nepotism, sampan). The people were asked to tell
what the word was. If they could not think of the exact word, they were
to tell everything they could about the word. Some people could give
other words with a similar meaning or similar sounds (sound being more
frequent than meaning), tell the first or last letter of the word, and even
tell how many syllables it had, but could not quite tell the word itself. For
example, when trying to remember sampan (a small Chinese boat), they
thought of such words as Saipan, Siam, and sarong; they also thought of
words similar in meaning, such as barge and junk. The phenomenon has
also been studied in memory for people's names, for poetry, and even
for odors (where it was called the "tip-of-the-nose" phenomenon).23
Another way to study the phenomenon has been to ask people
questions of general information. Some people could not recall the
answers, but still felt they knew them. Later recognition tests showed
that they were right. Other research has studied naturally occurring tipof-the-tongue experiences by having people keep diaries recording such
experiences. Research on elderly adults has found that they do not differ
from young adults in their feeling of knowing experiences or in their
accuracy of estimating how well they could remember something that
was on the tip of their tongue. A recent diary study found that over the
period of one month elderly adults reported about twice as many tip-ofthe-tongue experiences as young adults, but were able to resolve them
as well as the young adults did.26
The tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon has at least four implications for
understanding what memory is:
1. Memory is not an all-or-none process. Memory is a matter of
degree; it is a continuum, not a dichotomy. We do not necessarily
remember something either completely or not at all. Rather, we can
remember a part of something without remembering all of it.
2. Most memory is generative, not duplicative. Memory is not an
automatic picture-taking process. Most memories do not appear as fullblown, exact duplicates of the information learned, but are generated
through a process of reconstruction.
3. Words may be stored in memory in more than one way. They
may be stored in auditory terms (how many syllables and how they are
pronounced), in visual terms (the first and last letters of the word), and
in terms of meaning (cross-referenced with other words of similar
meaning).

Meet Your Memory: What Is It?

31

4. There is a difference between availability and accessibility of
information. The availability of information is shown by the fact that you
know when you know the answer to a question, or that you can produce
part of the word you are trying to recall. But although the information is
available, it is not completely accessible by unaided recall.

Meet Your Memory: How
Does It Work?

PATIENT: "DOC, I need help with a memory problem. I'll be talking
to someone, and right in the middle of the conversation I'll forget
what I am talking about." PSYCHIATRIST: "How long have you had
this problem?" PATIENT: "What problem?"

WIFE: "Oh-oh, I forgot to unplug the iron." HUSBAND: "Don't worry,
the house won't bum down. I forgot to turn off the water in the
tub."
There are three signs that you are getting senile. Thefirstone is
that you begin to lose your memory. . . and I can't remember the
other two.

ese are just a few examples of memory jokes and cartoons which I
ave collected. It has been said that we make jokes about things that
bother or concern us the most to help us deal with those things, and that
this may be one reason why there are so many jokes dealing with sex,
money, and weight. This may also be one reason why there are many
jokes about memory. Although memory jokes are not nearly as numerous
as are jokes about the other three topics, remembering and forgetting is
still the topic of much humor. We are concerned with how our memories
work, especially when they do not work. How do we remember? More
important, how and why do we forget? This chapter continues toward
the goal of chapter 2 to help you understand your memory by answering
a few questions that will help you better understand how your memory
works.
32

Meet Your Memory : How Does It Work?

33

HOW AND WHY DO WE FORGET?
In discussing short-term memory it was noted that forgetting is not all
bad. If you didn't forget, your mind would be cluttered with so many
trivial things that it would be impossible to select the useful and relevant
items you need for decisions. Thus, it is not desirable to clutter your
mind with unimportant things. Forgetting the unimportant may help you
to remember the important. The trick is, of course, to be able to forget
the unimportant, not the important.
You probably do not have to be told that forgetting is easier than
remembering. But why is it? One way of answering this question is to
consider again the "Three Rs of Remembering" in chapter 2. To forget
something you only have to fail at any one of the three stages—recording,
retaining, or retrieving—but to remember something you have to succeed at all three of these stages. It is as if there is only one chance to
remember versus three chances to forget. Psychologists have suggested
several theories to explain why we forget. Let us consider brieflyfiveof
the most common explanations (see reference 3, chapter 2):
Decay. This explanation suggests that memories cause some kind of
a physical "trace" in the brain that gradually decays or fades away with
time, such as a pathway across a meadow will become overgrown if not
used. The basis of forgetting is disuse. This is one of the oldest and
most widespread explanations of forgetting.
Repression. This explanation was suggested by the work of Sigmund
Freud on the unconscious mind. According to Freud, unpleasant or
unacceptable memories may be forgotten intentionally. They are pushed
into the unconscious on purpose so that the person will not have to live
with them. Although some of the details of Freud's elaborate theories
are not widely accepted, most psychologists do believe that such motivated forgetting can occur.
Distortion. Memories may be affected by our values and interests,
so that we remember some things the way we want to remember them.
This explanation suggests that we change our memories to fit what we
want them to be or how we feel they should be. To demonstrate such
distortion, read the following list of words aloud to someone: bed, rest,
awake, tired, dream, wake, night, eat, comfort, sound, slumber, snore.
Now ask the person to list as many of the words as he can remember.
Usually, at least half of the lists include the word sleep. Why? Because
most of the words are related to sleep, so it seems like "sleep" should
be on the list.1

34

YOUR MEMORY

Distortion has some interesting implications for courtroom practices
and eyewitness investigations. For example, by asking leading questions,
a questioner can cause a person to "remember" an event that never
occurred: "What color was the victim's coat?" may cause a person to
remember a coat that did not exist Similarly, statements that only imply
a conclusion may cause a person to remember the conclusion as if it had
happened. Such inferences are also exploited in advertising. For example,
the ad "Get through this winter without colds. Take Eradicold pills" does
not actually say that Eradicold pills prevent winter colds, but 85 percent
of people tested for memory of such an ad remembered it that way.2
Interference. Forgetting may not be affected so much by how much
time passes (as is suggested by the delay explanation) as it is by what
happens during that time. Much forgetting is likely due to interference
by other learning. Interference does not imply a limited memory capacity, where new information that is stuffed into our heads pushes the old
information out It is not so much the amount we learn as it is what we
learn that determines forgetting by interference.
Information you have learned in the past may interfere with your
memory for something you have learned recently. Psychologists refer to
this as proactive inhibition. It is "proactive" because the interference is
in a forward direction; learned material affects memory for material
learned later. It is "inhibition" because the effect is to inhibit or hinder
memory for the later material. Likewise, information you have learned
recently may interfere with your memory for something you learned in
the past. This is called retroactive inhibition, because the interference is
in a backward direction. Suppose that you met a number of people at a
business meeting last week and then met some more people at a party
last night. If you try to recall the names of the people at the party, you
might find that the names from the business meeting get in the way.
This is proactive inhibition. If you try to recall the names of the people
at the business meeting, you may find that the names of the party-goers
get in the way. This is retroactive inhibition.
Cue dependency. Afifthexplanation of forgetting is more recent than
the first four that have been discussed. It attributes forgetting to Mure
in retrieval (versus recording or retaining). The memory does not fade
away; it is not interfered with by other information; rather, it is merely
dependent on yourfindingthe right cue to get it This explanation is thus
referred to as "cue-dependent forgetting." If you can find the right cue,
you can retrieve a desired item from memory; if you "forget" the item it
is because you have not found the right cue. You have probably found

Meet Your Memory : How Does It Work?

35

yourself unable to remember something, and then recalled it later when
you saw or heard something that "jogged" your memory.
Your Memory Attic
To illustrate these five explanations of forgetting, let's compare your
memory to the attic of a house.3 You store things in your memory and in
your attic. Suppose you go to the attic tofinda specific item. The decay
explanation of forgetting would be like a "deteriorating room"; you cannot
find your item because it has been left in the attic so long that it has
deteriorated and disappeared. The repression explanation would be like
a "walled-up room"; part of the attic is blocked off, so you cannot get
into it to find the item. The distortion explanation would be somewhat
like a "rearranged room"; objects in the attic are all mixed up so you
cannot find your item because things are not arranged as you thought
you left them. The interference explanation would be like a "cluttered
room"; the room has become cluttered with other things that get in the
way when you try to find your item. The cue-dependency explanation
would be like a "locked room" where the items in the room are locked in
chests, drawers, and treasure boxes; you must find the right key
(retrieval cue) to unlock the one that contains your item.
No single explanation is adequate to account for all forgetting, so
each of these five explanations has its place. However, this book does
not deal much with the first three explanations of forgetting. Decay is,
not well substantiated by research. It may apply to short-term memory
but probably not to long-term memory. Repression, although fairly well
substantiated by clinical experiences, involves primarily memories of
traumatic, unpleasant, personal experiences. These kinds of memories
are not of central concern in this book. Distortion is substantiated by
some research evidence, but there is not a lot we can do about it except
perhaps to be aware of it and guard against it. Research evidence
indicates that interference is responsible for much of our forgetting, and
there is even more research support for cue-dependent forgetting.
Subsequent chapters discuss ways in which you can reduce interference
and cue yourself in searching your memory for information.
HOW FAST DO WE FORGET?
Research on memory indicates that we do not forget at a constant rate
but that most forgetting occurs soon after learning; the rate of forgetting
then slows down and levels off as time passes. Thus, most of what we
forget about something will occur shortly after we have learned it. For

36

YOUR MEMORY

example, after learning a list of nonsense syllables you would probably
forget almost half of them within 20 minutes, and more than two-thirds
after two days; a month later your memory would not be much lower
than it was at two days. Similarly, people who studied Spanish in high
school or college forgot most of what they had learned (about 60 percent)
within 3 years, but very little more (about 5 percent) through 50 years.
The decreasing rate of forgetting as time passes helps us understand
why drugs that can affect memory are most effective when given shortly
after learning, and why in retrograde amnesia recent memories are more
susceptible to interruption than older memories.4
Of course, not all learning follows this pattern of a decreasing
forgetting rate with time. Material that is learned very thoroughly or that
is very important to us may be retained all our lives. Also, we remember
the gist, or general idea, of what we learn much longer than we
remember specific details.5
Is there a difference between slow learners and faster learners in
their forgetting rates? Will a slow learner forget more rapidly than a fast
learner? Contrary to the belief of many people, the answer to this
question appears to be no. An analogy illustrates why this is so.6 Let's
compare the learning process to the pumping of water into a pyramidshaped beaker (see the diagram). Learning is represented by the level
of water. Forgetting is represented by evaporation. As the level of water
rises, the surface area decreases, so there is less evaporation. Fast input
(beaker A) represents the fast learner; his beaker fills up faster.
However, in time the slow input (beaker B) willfillthe beaker just as full.

Meet Your Memory : How Does It Work?

37

If we run water into each beaker the same amount of time, less
evaporation will occur from beaker A because it will be fuller and thus
have less surface area. But if we let the water continue to run into B until
it reaches the same level as A, then there will be no difference between
the two in the rate of evaporation.
Similarly, if a slow learner is allowed enough time to study something
so that he can reproduce it as readily as a fast learner, he will score just
as high as the fast learner in later tests of remembering. The ultimate
degree of learning (how well you learn it) rather than the rate of learning
(how fast you learn it) is the critical factor in the rate of forgetting; this
has been found for poetry as well as for word lists and in Nigeria as well
as in the United States. Research has also found that although young
adults generally learn faster than elderly adults, when the original
learning levels are equated there are no age differences in forgetting
rates.7
The beaker analogy has implications for students in school. A bright
student may do better on an examination than a dull one because he has
learned the material more effectively, not because he has a better
memory. If both students study a lesson for an hour, the bright student
will master the lesson more fully: He will have filled his beaker to a
higher level. But if the dull student fills his beaker to the same level by
studying for 2 or 3 hours, then he is likely to do equally well on the
examination. Thus, students of average learning ability can do as well in
school as students with greater learning ability by spending more time
studying.
The beaker analogy can also illustrate the rate of forgetting for
meaningful versus meaningless material. Let beaker A represent the
meaningful material and beaker B represent the meaningless material.
The more meaningful the material is, the faster it is learned. Does this
mean that it is remembered longer? Not necessarily. If the less meaningful material is studied until it is learned as well as the meaningful material,
then there will be no significant difference in how fast the two are
forgotten. Again, the rate of forgetting is determined more by how well
the material is learned than by how fast it is learned.
HOW DO WE REMEMBER PICTURES VERSUS WORDS?
Information can be recorded either in visual form (pictures, scenes,
faces) or in verbal form (words, numbers, names). For example, you can
see in your mind's eye a visual image (a mental picture) of a chair, or
you can think of the word chair. These two types of recording processes
may be referred to, respectively, as an imagery process and a verbal

38

YOUR MEMORY

process. Research shows that there are several ways in which visual
material is remembered differently from verbal material.
The imagery process appears to be best suited for representing
concrete events, objects, and words, whereas the verbal process may be
best suited for representing abstract verbal information. One reason for
this is that concrete nouns are better able to produce mental images than
are abstract nouns. The following four words illustrate the difference
between concrete and abstract nouns: Apple is more concrete than fruit,
fruit is more concrete than food, and food is more concrete than
nourishment. It is easier to picture an apple in your mind than it is to
picture nourishment.
There is some evidence that concrete words are processed in the
memory differently from abstract words. Concrete words and their
associated images may be processed by the visual system, whereas
abstract words may be processed by the verbal system. Not only may
visual and verbal memories be different processes but they may also occur
in different places. Evidence exists that visual memory and verbal memory are located in different parts of the brain. The right half of the brain
seems to play the predominant role in the visual imagery process; the
left half seems to predominate in the verbal process.8 (However, differences between the right brain and the left brain are not nearly as great
as are the similarities, or as the popular press would have us believe; the
recent fad in education and business of training people to use the right
halves of their brains goes way beyond the research data.)9
Further evidence for a difference between verbal memory and visual
memory is suggested by the finding that verbal and visual memory
processes may operate at different speeds. The average person can
generate the 26 letters of the alphabet (speaking to himself) in about 4
seconds, but it takes about 13 seconds to generate visual images of the
26 letters. Also, it takes longer to name a picture of an object than to
read the printed name of the object.10
The capacity of memory for pictures may be almost unlimited. We
saw in chapter 2 that recognition memory for 600 pictures was very high.
Another study illustrates this fact even more strikingly. People were
shown 2,560 different pictures over a period of several days. They were
later shown 280 pairs of pictures. One of each pair was a picture the
person had seen before and the other was not. The people were asked
to indicate which of the two pictures they had seen before. In this
recognition task they correctly identified about 90 percent of the pictures. Other research has found equally striking results with as many as
10,000 pictures, and that picture memory exceeds word memory when
measured by recall as well as by recognition. In addition, pictures were

Meet Your Memory : How Does It Work?

39

remembered with surprising accuracy as long as three months after
seeing them just once.11
The saying that "one picture is worth a thousand words" is usually
applied to the effectiveness of a picture in communicating an idea that
would take many words to express; it may also apply to the effectiveness
of a picture in remembering what was communicated. For example,
including pictures in a textbook can help the reader remember the
written text (see chapter 6). Also, many studies have found that pictures
of objects are remembered better than verbal descriptions of the objects,
and better than the names of the objects, by young children, adults, and
elderly adults.12 Similarly, one reason why visual imagery (mental pictures) may be. a powerful aid in recalling verbal material is because images
are apparently more memorable than words alone.13
Another reason why imagery may help in recalling verbal material is
that imagery may be processed in two different parts of the brain—a
nonverbal location and a verbal location.14 This means that a word that
can be visualized may be processed both in a verbal location and a visual
location. Concrete words may be recalled better than abstract terms that
are only verbal because of this dual representation (verbal and visual);
any information that is represented in two ways is more likely to be
recalled than if it is represented in only one way. You are more likely to
remember words plus images better than words alone for the same
reason that it is better to leave two notes for yourself than to leave only
one, or that it is better to cross-reference a paper under two headings in
a file cabinet: You are twice as likely to be able to retrieve the messages.
Of course, the two explanations above for why visual images may
help memory are not mutually exclusive. It may be that pictures are
inherently more memorable than words and that pictures are coded both
visually and verbally. However we try to explain it, we will see in chapter
4 that visual imagery can indeed improve recall dramatically. We will also
see in later chapters that visual imagery (as well as the use of actual
pictures) plays a central role in mnemonic systems.
HOW DO EXCEPTIONAL MEMORIES WORK?
Some people seem to have truly exceptional memory abilities, and do
not seem to forget nearly as fast or as much as most of us do. Do their
memories work differentlyfromours? In chapter 1 it was suggested that
memory is a learned skill more than an innate ability, and that most of
what people attribute to a photographic memory is merely the powerful
application of learned memory techniques. However, it was also noted
that there is a valid phenomenon that is somewhat similar to the popular

40

YOUR MEMORY

notion of photographic memory, which psychologists call "eidetic imagery."15 The word eidetic means "identical" or "duplicative." Eidetic
imagery is a very strong visual afterimage that enables a person to
duplicate a picture mentally and describe it in detail shortly after looking
at it. No more than 5 to 10 percent of children possess eidetic imagery,
and it is even rarer after adolescence. Eidetic imagery has been very
hard to study objectively, but most research indicates that it differs from
normal imagery in degree more than in kind: It is merely a more powerful
version of the capacity for visual imagery that we all possess (see chapter
4).
Eidetic imagery is probably the source of the notion of photographic
memory, but it differs from the popular notion of photographic memory
in several ways:
1. The eidetic image fades away soon after viewing the scene. It does
not stay with a person over a prolonged period of time, but lasts for
a few seconds to a few minutes.
2. The eidetic image is affected by the subjective state of the viewer.
The image may contain additions, omissions, or distortions, and the
aspects of the scene that are of most interest to the person tend to
be reproduced in the most detail. The image is not an objective
reproduction like a camera photograph.
3. The person does not take a split-second snapshot but requires a
viewing time of several seconds to scan the scene.
4. Images can not be brought back once they have faded away; thus,
people with eidetic imagery do not seem to be able to use their
eidetic images to improve long-term memory.
Psychologists have studied some people who seem to have exceptional memories that are not subject to all the limitations of eidetic
imagery. For example, one twenty-three-year-old woman reportedly
could look at a page of poetry in a foreign language and years later repeat
it verbatim, reading either forward or backward. She could retain a
pattern of 10,000 black-and-white squares in her mind for as long as
three months. However, she did not just take a snapshot like a camera
would but required some time to scan the pattern.16
Probably the best known example of a person who seemed to have
a truly photographic memory is given in the account by Alexandr Luria
of a Russian newspaper reporter named Shereshevskii, whom Luria
referred to simply as "S". S was able to recall perfectly as many as 70
words or numbers presented once, and could later produce them in
reverse order (you can get an idea how difficult this is by trying to repeat
the alphabet backward). He invariably performed successfully in experi-

Meet Your Memory : How Does It Work?

41

ments to test his retention (without being given any warning) 15 to 16
years after the session in which he had originally recalled the words!
Luria's description of these test sessions is interesting:
During the test sessions S would sit with his eyes closed, pause, then comment:
"Yes, yes. . . . This was a series you gave me once when we were in your
apartment. . . . You were wearing a gray suit and you looked at me like this.
Now, then, I can see you saying..." And with that he would reel off the series
precisely as I had given it to him at the earlier session. If one takes into account
that S had by then become a well-known mnemonist, who had to remember
hundreds and thousands of series, the feat seems even more remarkable.17
Like the twenty-three-year-old woman described above, S did not
merely take a snapshot of the information but required time to study it.
For example, memorizing a table of 20 digits required about 40 seconds
of study, and memorizing a table of 50 digits required 2 to 3 minutes of
study. One of the methods S used to perform such feats is similar to the
Loci system discussed in chapter 10.
A "photographic memory" is not necessary to perform amazing
feats of memory. For example, a man who could not pass a standard test
for eidetic imagery and who reported that he does not "see" the
numbers, could memorize a 16 x 16 matrix of 256 random digits.
Another man (V. P.), who apparently relied on verbal memory rather
than visual memory, could look at a 6 x 8 matrix of 48 digits for about 4
minutes and recall all 48 digits in any order two weeks later. A nineteenth-century memory prodigy could memorize a 100-digit number in
12 minutes if the digits were read to him, but he became confused if the
digits were shown to him in writing; another person could recite two and
one-half pages of material after reading it only once, although he had
poor visual imagery.18
Other exceptional memories studied by psychologists include the
following performances: a college student who could repeat a number up
to 73 digits long after hearing it once; another college student who could
do 79 digits; a waiter who could remember 19 complete dinner orders at
once; a college student who could perform such feats as squaring 6-digit
numbers in his head (for example, 716,7232); and one man (T. E.) who
showed an exceptional memory for such varied material as numbers,
prose, and people's names and faces (most exceptional memories focus
on only one kind of material).19 All of these performances have been
attributed by the researchers, and by the performers themselves, to the
use of learned mnemonics, interest, and practice more than to innate
abilities. Another example of the role of learned mnemonics is a study I
did with six students who had learned the Phonetic system (chapter 12).

42

YOUR MEMORY

They tried to duplicate S's feat of memorizing a 4 x 5 matrix of 20 digits
in 40 seconds, so they could recall it by rows or columns, forward and
backwards. Four of the six students did it in 1 minute or less, including
one student who did it in 41 seconds and one who did it in 36 seconds.20
Although there are probably a few individuals with exceptional
memories, such as Luria's S, who do possess some inborn abilities that
make them innately different from other people (one psychologist called
them "memorists" to distinguish them from the more common "mnemonists"),21 the best conclusion regarding how most exceptional memories work seems to be consistent with the earlier conclusions regarding
photographic and eidetic memories. Exceptional memories seem to differ
from ordinary memories more in degree than in kind, and to depend more
on learned than innate abilities. This means that when we see someone
perform an amazing memory feat, we should probably admire her
motivation more than her ability.
The following excerpt from a memory textbook represents the view
of most psychologists regarding most exceptional memories:
Many of the devices the experts use are abilities we have studied in the preceding
chapters, carried to unusual heights. . . . experts may not be so different from
nonexperts as we once imagined. They seem to havefinelyhoned talents, but
they are talents that also exist in the "average" information processor we have
been studying, even if they appear in lesser form.22
There is another interesting memory phenomenon that fits under
the heading of exceptional memories. Some people possess one outstanding mental ability, such as a so-called photographic memory, a
chess-playing ability, or the ability to do complex mathematical calculations in their heads, but lack general intelligence. Such a person is called
an idiot savant, a term meaning "wise idiot."23
Having a so-called photographic memory, or any other outstanding
mental skill, is not necessarily a blessing. Idiot savants are generally
incompetent at anything other than their one feat, being unable to reason
or to comprehend meaning. In some cases, they may even be retarded
in areas other than that of their feat. Similarly, the photographic memory
of Luria's S was in many ways more of a burden than a blessing. When
he tried to read, every word brought forth an image; these images
cluttered his mind and prevented him from understanding what he was
reading. He also found it hard to erase images that were no longer
useful. (Recall the discussion in chapter 2 of how difficult it would be to
select relevant information if all the information were constantly at the
fore of our awareness.) In addition, S could only understand what was
concrete enough to visualize. Abstract ideas presented problems and

Meet Your Memory : How Does It Work?

43

torments to him, as did metaphors and synonyms (for example, when a
person was called a "baby" on one page and a "child" on another, it was
hard for S to understand that the words were referring to the same
person). Thus, it was very difficult for S to understand the overall
meaning of material he read.
HOW WELL DOES SLEEP LEARNING WORK?
Think about how much time and effort you would save in learning if you
could just play a tape recording of the material while you were asleep
and learn it. Isn't it a shame to waste all that time sleeping when you
could be learning something useful at the same time? This is the kind of
argument offered in advertisements for sleep-learning machines. Some
radio stations have even broadcast messages during the night to help
sleeping people lose weight, quit smoking, and reduce tension. Can you
really learn in your sleep? Dozens of studies have been conducted on
sleep learning in the United States and in the U.S.S.R.24
A central issue in determining whether you can learn in your sleep
is what we mean by the term sleep. There are several stages of sleep,
ranging from very light to very deep sleep. Early studies that showed
positive effects of sleep learning did not determine whether people were
really asleep or take into account how deeply asleep they were. In later
controlled studies, the level of sleep was measured by observing the
people's brain-wave patterns on an electroencephalograph. The people
showed no evidence of remembering questions and answers or word lists
that had been read to them while they were soundly asleep. In 1970 the
New York attorney general banned the advertising of a language-learning
machine that claimed to teach a person in his sleep, on the grounds that
there was no evidence that a language could be learned while a person
slept.25
What about light sleep? Is it possible to remember material that is
read to you when you are just barely asleep? There is some evidence
that people can learn while they are in states of drowsiness or of very
light sleep. Most research of this kind has been conducted in the
U.S.S.R. In one study that was conducted in the United States, people
were read statements such as A is for apple" during the different
stages of sleep. After they awoke, they were asked to check any familiar
word appearing on a list of 10 words beginning with A. Correct words
were recognized from 28 percent of the statements presented in the
lightest stage of sleep, 10 percent in the next lightest stage, and none in
deep sleep.26
The suggestion that it may be possible to learn in very light sleep is
subject to several conditions.

44

YOUR MEMORY

1. The material must be presented at just the right level of drowsiness
or light sleep. If the person is not asleep enough the material will
wake him up. If he is too deeply asleep, he will not remember any of
it.
2. No complex material or material involving reasoning or understanding
can be learned. Only material such as nonsense syllables, Morse
code, technical expressions, facts, dates, foreign language vocabulary, and simple formulas constitute potential materials for sleep
learning.
3. Even when conditions one and two are met, sleep learning is not
sufficient by itself, but only as an aid to daytime studies.
Thus, although it may be possible to learn some kinds of material in
some stages of sleep, it is an inefficient way to learn. You are better off
staying awake while you are studying or listening to a lecture.
Some research evidence indicates that people can remember more
if they go to sleep immediately after learning than if they stay awake
during the same period of time, but that they remember less if they
sleep immediately before learning. In both of these situations the learning
itself took place when the people were awake.27
Subliminal Learning
An area of research that is related to sleep learning is subliminal learning
and advertising. The term subliminal means below the level of conscious
awareness and refers to messages that are too fast or too weak for us to
be aware of them. During the 1950s "subliminal advertising" became
publicized and people became concerned about its implications for mind
control. A famous case indicated that messages saying "eat popcorn" and
"drink Coca-Cola" wereflashedon a theater movie screen during movies
over a six-week period. They were flashed so fast that no one was
consciously aware of them. Popcorn sales reportedly shot up 50 percent
and Coke sales went up 18 percent. Many people were justifiably
concerned at the implications of this report. In the 1980s this concern
has arisen again, and now includes rock music with "Satanic messages"
that are said to be consciously discernible when the recording is played
backward and unconsciously persuasive when the recording is played
normally.
During the 1980s there has been increasing research interest in
unconscious processing, and there is some research evidence that people
can process limited sensory information without conscious awareness in
the artificial distraction-free setting of a research laboratory, where their

Meet Your Memory : How Does It Work?

45

attention isfinelyfocused on the task.28 However, no one has been able
to duplicate the reported "subliminal advertising^' effect of the 1950s,
and well-controlled research studies have found no evidence that subliminal messages in ads or music have significant effects on either learning
or behavior.29
Thus, you are not likely to learn and remember material, whether
you are asleep or awake, if you are not consciously aware that it is being
presented to you.

41
j _c

How to Remember Almost
Anything: Basic Principles

C

ertain basic principles of learning and memory underlie almost all
memory tasks. These principles are general enough so that one or
more of them can be applied to help remember almost anything. Some
of the basic principles on which virtually all learning and memory are
based are meaningfulness, organization, association, visualization, and
attention. Each of these principles is discussed in this chapter, and
additional basic principles are discussed in chapter 5. The mnemonic
systems discussed in later chapters use these principles.

MEANINGFULNESS: "THAT DOESN'T MAKE SENSE"
One of the main determinants of how easy something is to learn is how
meaningful it is to the learner. If it doesn't make sense, it will be hard to
learn; the more meaningful it is, the easier it will be to learn. The
alternative to meaningful learning is learning by "rote." Rote memory
refers to trying to remember something by repeating it over and over
without doing anything to make it meaningful.
Words are easier to remember than nonsense syllables. Concrete
words are easier to remember than abstract words. Words grouped into
meaningful categories are easier to remember than words given in
meaningless order. Sentences are easier to remember than words in
46

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic

Principles•

47

ungrammatical order. And well-organized paragraphs and stories are
easier to remember than disorganized ones. At all levels, meaningfulness
affects memory. In one study that shows the effect of meaning on
learning, people memorized a list of 200 nonsense syllables, a 200-word
prose passage, and 200 words of poetry. The nonsense syllables took
about IV2 hours to memorize; the prose took less than Vz hour, and the
poetry took about 10 minutes.1
Bsople who participate in experiments on learning sometimes try
various personal strategies to give meaning to a list of words, foreign
words, nonsense syllables, or nonsense drawings, so that they can learn
them more easily. They may try converting a nonsense syllable into a
meaningful word by using a substitute word (HAWK for HOK), adding a
letter (TACK for TAC), or substituting a letter (CUT for KUT). Others
try organizing material into meaningful units or try looking for a pattern.
These people realize that you should try to make something meaningful
in order to remember it.2
Some of the other basic principles discussed in this chapter can help
make material meaningful; in fact, it is hard to define meaningful learning
without referring to such principles as organization and association.3 In
addition to these other principles, familiarity, rhymes, and patterns also
can help make material meaningful.
Familiarity
Generally, the more you know about a particular subject the easier it is
to learn new information about it, not only in terms of remembering the
information but also in terms of understanding it.4 Learning builds on
learning. If you already know something about a topic, if you are already
familiar with it, then not only will the new information be more meaningful
but you will also have something with which to associate it (association is
discussed later). For example, if a list of cooking terms and sports terms
is given to a group of men and women, more women may memorize the
cooking terms faster and more men the sports terms; these terms are
more familiar and thus more meaningful to them. We saw in chapter 2
that experienced chess players can remember chess positions better
than inexperienced players. Familiarity plays an important role in this
effect. In addition to being familiar with more patterns of these pieces,
experienced players are better at integrating familiar configurations into
a meaningful whole.5
The study described in chapter 2 in which a three-year-old child
who was read passages of Greek showed some memory of the Greek at
age eight suggests another advantage of familiarity. Exposure to some-

48

YOUR MEMORY

thing may result in partial learning of it even without the intent to learn.
Thus, a child whose parents read to him may later learn to read more
easily, or a child with music in his house may later learn music more
easily.
Several recent research findings also illustrate the importance of
familiarity in remembering. College students who heard a list of 12
sayings or proverbs (such as, "An apple a day keeps the doctor away")
remembered more familiar sayings than unfamiliar sayings. Familiarity
with the words on a word list reduced differences between young and
elderly adults in recall (in fact, when the words used were more familiar
to older adults, they actually outperformed young adults). In a series of
studies on recall and organization of information by black and white
adolescents, the researcher reported that the most noteworthy finding
was the positive relationship between their performance and their familiarity with the information.6
Rhymes
Do you remember when Columbus discovered America? What happened
in fourteen hundred and ninety-two? Most likely you learned this rhyme
at one time: "In fourteen hundred and ninety-two, Columbus sailed the
ocean blue." Similarly the rhyme, "i before e except after c; or when
sounded like a, as in neighbor and weigh," helps you to remember how
to spell words with ie in them. Many people rely on a rhyme to help
them remember how many days are in each month: "Thirty days has
September, April, June, and November . . . " Rhythm and rhyme are
used by children in learning the alphabet with the following song (which
also uses chunking):
AB-CD-EFG
ffi-JK-LMNOP
QRS-TUV
WX-YandZ.
Now I've said my ABCs,
Tell me what you think of me.
These are just a few examples of how rhyme can be used to impose
meaning on material that is not inherently meaningful. If you can make
up a rhyme involving the material to be learned, it will make the material
more meaningful and thus easier to remember. Also, research has shown
that when you are trying to recall a word, other words that rhyme with
it may be effective cues to help recall it, and that when a list of words is
recalled, words that rhyme tend to be recalled together, even when they
were not together in the original list.7

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic

Principles•

49

Patterns
If you canfinda pattern, rule, or underlying principle in the material, you
will likely be able to learn it easier. It was noted in chapter 2 that the
number 376-315-374-264 is easier to remember if you arrange it in
four groups of three. The task is even easier if you can see some pattern
or relationships among the four groups. For example, the first three
groups all start with 3, and thefirstand third groups both have a 7 next;
the second digits in the last two groups are only one digit apart (7 and
6), and the last digit is the same (4). Noticing such patterns helps make
the number more meaningful. Similarly, looking for patterns in phone
numbers, addresses, dates, or any other numbers will help you remember them. For example, the phone number 375-2553 might be analyzed
as follows: 3 into 75 gives 25, followed by another 5 (2fives),and ending
with the same number it starts with (3).
Some people tried to memorize the following 24-digit number:
581215192226293336404347. Try it yourself before you read any further. Do you see any pattern in the number? Some of the people were
asked to learn the number by rote repetition. Others learned a pattern.
Three weeks later none of the people in the first group could recall the
number, but 23 percent of the people who learned the pattern could
recall the number. You may havefiguredout by now that the pattern is
to start with 5, add 3 to get 8, then add 4 to get 12, then add 3, then
add 4, and so on. Once you find the pattern, all you have to do is
remember the pattern and use it to generate the sequence.8
This last example illustrates chunking as well as meaning. If you can
find a pattern, you only have to remember one piece of information (5
plus 3 then 4, alternately) rather than 24 pieces of information. Finding a
pattern is one way to code a number to put it in long-term memory; you
no longer have to keep rehearsing it to remember it. Thus, in addition to
making material more meaningful, patterns serve to chunk the material
so there is less to remember. If you can see a pattern, then all you have
to remember is the pattern, and you can generate the original material.
The use of patterns is not limited to memory for numbers. One
study found that when a paired-associate word list had a pattern underlying the associations, the associations were remembered better a week
later than when the list was tested without an underlying pattern. We
have seen that a chess master can memorize the positions of pieces in a
game at a glance because they form a pattern, but if the pieces are
arranged randomly then he does not do much better than the beginner;
similarfindingshave been reported in memory for bridge hands, for the
game of Go, for maps, and even for music. Leon Fleischer is an
internationally famous pianist who has to learn whole piano concerts of

50

YOUR MEMORY

20,000 distinct notes; he tries to notice underlying patterns in the music
so that he comes away from studying a piece not only with a mere
sequence of notes but with what he calls "profound understanding of the
structure of the material."9
ORGANIZATION: "GET IT ALL TOGETHER"
How useful would a dictionary be if the words were listed in random
order rather than alphabetically? One of the reasons you can find a
particular word in a dictionary is because the words are organized in
alphabetical order. Similarly, one of the reasons you canfinda book in a
library, or a particular document in a file cabinet, is because the
information is organized. You do not have to search through all the words
in the dictionary, all the books in the library, or all the documents in the
file cabinet; you merely go to the section where the desired item is
stored. Of course, not only must the information be organized but it
must be cataloged if there is a large amount of information. You could not
find much in a library without the card or computer catalog. The catalog's
usefulness is extended even further if the materials in the catalog are
cross-referenced.
Material is also organized in long-term memory so that you don't
need to search through everything in your memory to find specific
information.10 A simple demonstration of this fact is to try recalling the
names of all the states in the United States. Before you read any further,
take 1 minute to recall as many state names as you can. You probably do
not randomly start naming states, but make a systematic search of
memory. Most likely you will name them geographically, starting with
the states in a certain part of the country and working across the
country; or you might start with the ones you have visited. Another
possibility is that you may name them alphabetically, starting with the
states that begin with the letter A. The important point is that your
recall will be organized, not haphazard.
Similarly, if you try to make a list of men's names that begin with
the letter R, you do not just start recalling words randomly (names and
nonnames, men's names and women's names, R names and A names,
etc.) but immediately go right to the section of your memory where
"men's R names" are stored. Even within this section, your recall does
not occur randomly. You may try to think of all yourfriendswhose names
begin with R, or you may proceed alphabetically (Ra, Re, etc.), or you
may try to think of famous people whose names begin with R.
These examples of state names and R names show that information
is organized in memory. The more you consciously organize material at

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic

Principles•

51

the time you are first learning it, the easier it is to retrieve. It will be
easier to find this material when you want it if you put it into memory in
some organized way. Note, however, that a particular way of organizing
material may not be equally effective for every recall task. For example,
the organization of a dictionary is convenient for looking up the meaning
of a given word or forfindingout how many words start with the letters
cy but it is not convenient for finding a word that rhymes with a given
word or finding out how many words end in the letters cy. Similarly, if
you originally learned the state names organized in alphabetical order
sometime in the past, then using the letters of the alphabet to retrieve
the names would be more effective than if you had not previously learned
the names alphabetically. The power of sequential organization in recall
can also be illustrated by trying to recite all the letters in the alphabet.
This is an easy task for most people. But now try to recite all the letters
in random order (W, C, A, M, etc.). You will soon find that you have a
hard time keeping track of how many letters you have named and which
ones.
In addition to arranging the order of material in a meaningful
sequence, another way to organize material is to group it into similar
categories. Research shows that presenting information organized into
categories helps in learning the information. Learning and memory are
helped even when items are not grouped into categories, but the people
are told the categories into which the terms could be organized, or are
told to pay attention to the categories.11
Fteople may impose their own organization to help learn a list of
items that is not presented in categories, and they still tend to recall the
material by categories later even if they do not learn it organized by
categories. For example, if you gave people the following list of words to
learn—man, rose, dog, pansy, woman, horse, child, cat, carnation—
they would likely recall the words grouped in similar categories: man,
woman, child; dog, cat, horse; rose, pansy, carnation. Children as young
as six years old were taught to use this organizing strategy well enough
to significantly improve their memories for 18-item lists. If the items to
be remembered could not be grouped by categories, they would likely
be grouped by other criteria, such as the samefirstletter.12
It has been found that people who are instructed to just organize
material remember it as well as people who are instructed to learn the
material. The value of organization is not limited to word lists. Organized
paragraphs are also recalled better than unorganized ones, and stories
that are organized logically (with one event leading to another) are
remembered better than stories that jump around from one point to
another and do not make as much sense. Nor is the value of organization

52

YOUR MEMORY

in memory limited to verbal material. Objects that are organized in a
meaningful, coherent picture are remembered better than objects in a
jumbled picture.13
One value of organization is that it can be used to make material
meaningful. Consider the number 581215192226293336404347 discussed earlier in this chapter. If the number were regrouped as follows—
5 8 12 15 19 22 26 29 33 36 40 43 47—then you would be much more
likely to see the pattern and thus learn the number faster. Similarly, the
following set of letters may not be too easy to memorize: BUS HAW OR
THIS T WOBIR DH AND INT HE INT HE. But if we reorganize the
letters (not the order, but just the grouping) we get a more meaningful
set of letters: BUSH A WORTH IS TWO BIRD HAND IN THE IN THE.
Reorganizing the order of the words gives A BIRD IN THE HAND IS
WORTH TWO IN THE BUSH. What makes this last set of letters so
much easier to remember? It consists of the same elements, but they
are reorganized to give them more meaning.
Another value of organization is that it can involve chunking. The
previous example of the 12-digit number divided into 3-digit chunk? (376315-374-264) involved organizing the numbers by grouping them. People
who are learning to type on a typewriter or computer keyboard may
begin by coding each letter as a separate chunk. Soon they are able to
group the letters into words; even phrases may be perceived as chunks.
Thus, more efficient organization reduces the amount of material to be
learned, which increases the length of the message that can be remembered. A somewhat similar situation exists for a child who knows the
letters of the alphabet but does not know, for example, the word
automobile. To remember this word he has to remember 10 things; the
adult has to remember only one. Adults can chunk , even further and
remember phrases ("I beg your pardon") and even longer sentences ("A
bird in the hand is worth two in the bush") as one chunk.
As a practical example of the use of organization, suppose you had
the following items to remember for a shopping list: cookies, grapes,
cheese, can opener, chicken, pie, butter, bananas, bread, pork, gum. It
may help you to reorganize the items by categories: dairy—butter,
cheese; bakery goods—cookies, pie, bread; meat—chicken, pork;
fruit—grapes, bananas; and other—can opener, gum. You now have five
chunks of 2 or 3 items each rather than 11 separate items to remember.
Another possibility is to group the items by the same first letters: C—
cheese, cookies, chicken, can opener; B—butter, bread, bananas; G—
grapes, gum; and P—pie, pork. Then you could cue your memory by
remembering ""four C's, three B's, two G's, and twoP's."

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic

Principles•

53

The Serial Position Effect
The order in which items in a serial learning task are organized can affect
how easy they are to learn and remember; this finding is called the
"serial position effect." Items in the middle part of a list will take longer
to learn and will be harder to remember than will items at the beginning
and end of the list. For example, most people who tried to remember
the names of the presidents of the United States could recall the first
half-dozen and the last half-dozen but could not remember very many in
between.14
The serial position effect is affected by the amount of time between
learning and recall. When recall occurs immediately after learning, the
last few items in the list tend to be remembered better than the first
few; however, when there is some delay between learning and recall, the
first few items tend to be remembered better than the last few.
Regardless of the time between learning and recall, the first few items
and the last few items are easier to remember than those in between.
The serial position effect is well supported by research evidence. It
occurs in all serial learning tasks and for all modes of presentation and
types of material (including spelling words and memory for lectures).
Recent research has been aimed more at theoretical explanations of the
effect than at demonstrating its existence.15
There are at least two ways you can use the serial position effect to
help you remember better. First, if the items you are learning do not
have to be in a certain order, arrange them so that the more complex,
less meaningful items are at the ends of the list and the simpler, more
meaningful items are in the middle. Second, When you have a learning
task where you cannot change the order of the items, spend more time
and effort studying the middle part of the list than thefirstand last parts.
ASSOCIATION: "THAT REMINDS ME"
Can you draw a rough outline of Italy? How about Denmark? Most likely
you can do better with Italy. Why? One reason is that at some time it
was probably pointed out to you that Italy iooks like a boot. This
illustrates the use of association. Association refers to relating what you
want to learn to something you already know. This can be done with
analogies (which is why several analogies have been used throughout this
book), metaphors, and examples, and by comparing, contrasting, or
rewording.16
One way to remember the difference in spelling between the kind of
"principle" you learn in school and the "principal" of the school is that a

54

YOUR MEMORY

principle is a rule, and a principal is a gal (whether or not that last
statement is true, at least it is meaningful); to remember how to spell
"believe," never believe a lie; to remember the difference between port
and starboard, remember that "port" and "left" both have four letters;
to remember the difference between stalactites and stalagmites, remember that stalactites grow from the ceiling and stalagmites grow from the
ground. All of these simple examples illustrate the principle of associating
something you want to remember with something you already know. You
already know how to spell "pal" and "lie," how many letters are in "left,"
and what letters "ceiling" and "ground" start with.
A simple association helped my three-year-old son remember the
difference between hotels and motels. We were on a lecture circuit in
which we stayed only two or three days in any one city. He learned that
we sometimes stayed in hotels and sometimes in motels, but it was hard
for him to keep straight which was which. The way I defined the terms
for him was that in motels you enter your room directly from the outside,
but in hotels you enter your room from the hallway. He could remember
the statement that "hotels have halls," and using this association of the
two h words he was pleased that he could correctly identify the places
where we stayed for the rest of the trip.
In memorizing a number, you might try to associate it with familiar
numbers, dates, or events. For example, the phone number 375-2553
might associate for one person as follows: 3 is the number of digits in
the prefix, 75 was the middle of the 1970s decade, 25 is my age, and 53
represents my parents' anniversary (May 3). Merely expressing a number in terms of familiar units can give it some meaning. For example, the
number 1206 could be thought of as a price ($12.06), a time (12:06), or
a distance (1,206 meters).
Association can even occur at the unconscious level. Have you ever
seen or heard something and said, "Oh, that reminds me . . . ?" The
reason for such an experience is that somehow in the past those two
things became associated with each other, so that bringing one of them
from memory drew the other with it. I had an interesting experience in
college that illustrates unconscious association. A fellow student in one
of my classes came up to me about halfway through the semester and
said, "I just figured out why I don't like you." Naturally that caught my
attention, so I asked him why. He said, "Every time I looked at you I felt
that I didn't like you, but I could never really figure out why. Today it
suddenly dawned on me. A few years ago in a health class I saw a movie
on venereal disease, and you remind me of the bad guy in the movie."
This example shows that we can form associations and have them affect
us even without being consciously aware of them (incidentally, I was not
in the movie).

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic

Principles•

55

Associating information with yourself and with events in your life
can help you remember it. For example, you can remember when certain
events happened by associating them with other more significant events
that you know you will never forget, like the avid golfer who never got in
trouble with his wife for forgetting their anniversary: He just remembered that they were married exactly one week after he got a hole in
one. Although this example is fiction, research evidence shows that
people do remember information (including personal and public events)
better when they try to relate it to themselves and to events in their own
lives.17
One way association helps memory is to make material meaningful.
In fact, in research on learning, the meaningfulness of a word frequently
has been defined in terms of the number of associations it has.18 In
discussing familiarity it was noted that learning builds on learning.
Association plays an important role in this process. The more you know
about a topic, the more you have to associate new facts with, and the
more facts a fact is associated with the better you remember it. This
leads us to the next point.
Besides giving meaning, association can help memory by giving us
cross-referencing in our memories. You will have a greater likelihood of
finding a letter from a bookstore concerning your account if copies of the
letter arefiledunder "correspondence," "books," and "charge accounts"
than if youfileonly one copy under a single category. Similarly, the more
other information you can associate a particular fact with in your memory,
the more pathways you can use tofindit. In fact, there is evidence that
information is represented in memory as a network of associations among
concepts, even if we do not purposely make such multiple associations.19
This section on association is primarily oriented toward the use of
association by the person doing the learning. Association can also be
used by a teacher to help other people learn. Research has found that
both remembering and understanding new information are improved
when teachers help students relate the information to what they already
know.20 So you can use association (as well as the other principles) not
only to improve your own memory but also to improve your ability to
teach others.
Think Around It
By a technique that might be called "thinking around it," association can
help you retrieve information that you know is stored in your memory
but that you cannot quite get out. This technique consists of thinking of
everything you can that might be associated in any way with the specific
item you are trying to retrieve, including the context in which you

56

YOUR MEMORY

learned it (see chapter 5). Thinking around it is one of very few memory
techniques that can be applied at the retrieval stage of memory rather
than at the recording stage.
Suppose, for example, you are trying to think of the name of that
favorite teacher you had in school many years ago. You might try thinking
of the classroom itself, where you sat, what he or she looked like, the
names of other students in the class, or the names of other teachers you
had that year. One of these other items might have become associated
with your favorite teacher's name enough to bring it out. This approach
was found to be an effective technique for people trying to remember
the names of high school classmates. They would think of a variety of
settings (such as who was on the football team or who dated whom) to
help them recall names, and typically an image of a person or some fact
about that person would be retrieved before the name itself.21
Thinking around it has been used to help crime and accident
witnesses recall details such as license plate numbers. The witnesses
were asked to mentally put themselves back at the scene and report
everything they could think of, even partial information or things that
seemed only remotely related. Sometimes seemingly irrelevant or incomplete information would help them remember something else more
relevant or complete. People viewing a filmed simulation of a crime were
able to remember up to 35 percent more using this approach than were
those given a standard police interview.22
This technique of searching your memory for something that is lost
is similar to what you do in searching for a lost object in your house. You
do not know the exact spot to look in (or the object would not be lost) so
you search in the general area where you think it might be, such as in
the room where you saw it last. As with many memory techniques,
thinking around it is not a new idea. This approach was described more
than 150 years ago by James Mill, an English philosopher. After quoting
Mill's description, William James explained the philosophy underlying the
technique:
In short, we make a search in our memory for a forgotten idea, just as we
rummage our house for a lost object. In both cases we visit what seems to us
the probable neighborhood of that which we miss. We turn over the things under
which, or within which, or alongside of which, it may possibly be; and if it lies
near them, it soon comes to view."23

VISUALIZATION: " I CAN SEE IT ALL NOW"
How many windows are in your house? Your memory search is more
likely visual than verbal in answering such a question. You conjure up a

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic Principles•

57

visual image of each room and count the windows, and then move on to
the next room. This task, which is not too hard for most people,
illustrates the use of visual images in memory.
There is research evidence from as long ago as the 1800s indicating
that visual imagery can improve memory for verbal material. However,
imagery was not considered an appropriate field of study for most
psychologists from the early 1900s until the 1960s; it was viewed as
being something going on inside the person that could not be objectively
studied. In fact, in an extensive survey of the field of human learning
published in 1952, mental imagery and visualization were not even
mentioned. Research on conscious processes, including imagery, has
become more acceptable the past two decades.24
The number of article references appearing under the heading of
"Imagery" m Psychological Abstracts (a journal that publishes summaries
of all of the research articles published in psychology) reflects the
increased research interest since the 1960s: From 1960 to 1964, there
was an average of 5 articles published per year; from 1965 to 1969, 22
articles per year; from 1970 to 1974, about 99 articles; from 1975 to
1979, about 165 articles; from 1980 to 1984, about 145 articles. (The
total number of references has also increased since 1960, but not as fast
as the "imagery" references.) The increased interest in imagery is also
reflected in the establishment of an international association for imagery
researchers (International Imagery Association) and a journal for imagery
research (Journal of Mental Imagery) in the late 1970s. Much of the
research done since the mid-1960s on imagery and its effectiveness in
memory has been summarized in several books published in the 1980s.25
In chapter 2 we saw that memory for pictures is very powerful and
that imagery is also effective for verbal material. Two possible reasons
were suggested: First, images are inherently more memorable than
words; second, words that evoke images are coded dually (in both verbal
and visual memory) so that there is twice as great a likelihood of
remembering them. There are other theories about why imagery is such
a powerful memory aid, but regardless of what the reason is, the
important point for our purpose is that visual imagery does help memory.
We can take advantage of this fact by visualizing material we want to
remember.
Visualization of verbal material does not mean picturing the words
themselves in your mind but picturing the objects, events, or ideas the
words stand for. There are several lines of evidence to indicate that such
imagery helps in learning verbal material:26
1. Concrete (high imagery) words and sentences are almost always
learned faster and remembered better than abstract words.

58

YOUR MEMORY

2. People report spontaneous use of mental pictures in learning particular paired-associate word pairs, and tend to learn these pairs most
quickly.
3. Instructing people to use mental pictures relating two words of a pair
greatly helps paired-associate learning of nouns.
4. People who report vivid visual imagery perform better in tests of
recall than people who report poor visual imagery.
Many of the numerous studies showing the effectiveness of visual
imagery in remembering have used a paired-associate learning task (see
chapter 2). The general approach of studies on imagery in pairedassociate learning is to instruct some people to use verbal techniques to
associate the words, and to instruct others to form images representing
the words and associate the images for each pair of words. For example,
for "dog-broom" you might picture a dog sweeping the house with a
broom, and for a "door-baby" you might picture a baby hanging onto a
doorknob. The generalfindingof these studies is that the imagers learn
and remember much more effectively than the verbalizers. In fact, in
many of these studies, the effect of using imagery can be underestimated
because people who are instructed to verbalize sometimes report using
imagery spontaneously.
Many real-life learning situations involve paired-associate learning,
such as capitals of states, names andfaces,firstnames and last names,
foreign languages, vocabulary words, and names and sounds of letters.
Some mnemonic systems in later chapters also involve paired-associate
learning, so that paired-associate research is relevant to their use also.
The role of imagery in many of these areas is discussed in later chapters.
Most of this section has discussed the use of imagery to learn
words, because most of the research has been done with pairs of nouns.
However, research shows that the value of imagery is not limited to
nouns; imagery has also been found to aid memory for verbs and adverbs.
Nor is the value of imagery limited to memory for word lists or pairs of
words. Visual imagery has been found to help in learning sentences,
stories and other prose material, and even concepts.27 Ways to use
imagery effectively and some of its strengths and limitations are discussed further in chapters 7 and 8.
Of course, the main advantage of imagery is that it can make
learning more effective. Another advantage is that it can make learning
more fun. Most people find it more interesting to picture images and
associate them than to merely repeat words over and over by rote
methods to memorize them. One of the comments of my memory
students that was included in the introduction to this book referred to

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic

Principles•

59

the mnemonic systems based on visual imagery that are discussed in
later chapters: "The systems make learning seem more like a game than
work. I almost feel guilty, it's so fun."
ATTENTION: "I DON'T GET IT"
An important principle of memory is suggested by a statement that has
been attributed to Oliver Wendell Holmes: "A man must get a thing
before he can forget it."28 Frequently when we say we forgot something,
what we really should say is that we never actually got it in the first
place: we were never consciously paying attention to it. The following
quiz may help you recognize this distinction between forgetting and not
getting.
1. Which color is on top on a stoplight?
2. Whose image is on a penny? Is he wearing a tie?
3. What four words besides "In God We Trust" appear on most U.S.
coins?
4. When water goes down the drain, does it swirl clockwise or counterclockwise?
5. What letters, if any, are missing on a telephone dial?
Can you answer all of these questions? If not, don't feel too bad.
One study of 20 adult U.S. citizens found that only 1 person was able to
draw the head side of a penny accurately from memory (that person was
an active penny collector), and only 15 out of 36 could recognize the
correct drawing from a set of drawings of pennies.29 If you were not able
to answer some of the questions on the quiz, the reason is probably not
that you forgot. Although you have seen pennies and used the phone
many times, you probably have never consciously paid attention to these
things; thus, you cannot accurately say that you do not remember what
letters are missing on the phone dial. A more accurate answer is that
you never really knew in the first place. The correct answers to the
questions are: (1) red; (2) Lincoln, yes (a bow tie); (3) United States of
America; (4) counterclockwise (in the Northern Hemisphere); (5) Q, Z.
Some of the difficulty people report with "bad memories" is not a
matter of forgetting, but simply of not learning in thefirstplace. Bsople
blame their memories for something that is not their memories' fault. If
. you want to remember something, you must pay attention to it, concentrate on it, and make sure you get it in thefirstplace. We can talk about
forgetting only if there is some evidence of learning.
A person can really only pay attention to one thing at a time. You

60

YOUR MEMORY

might be able to read a newspaper while you are also watching TV, or
listen to two different party conversations at the same time (the one at
your table and the more interesting one you are eavesdropping on at the
next table), but that is by switching your attention back and forth rather
than by simultaneously attending to both things. One psychologist compared this characteristic of attention to a TV remote channel selector.30
You can only watch one channel at a time, so you miss what is on another
channel at the same time, but by switching back and forth between
channels you can sit back and "watch" two shows simultaneously. This
works satisfactorily for simple shows, but if we try it with complex
shows, we get lost Similarly, if we try to learn material that is complex
or difficult, we will not get it very well if our attention is divided or
distracted.
Sometimes when students complain about forgetting things they
studied, it may be true that they do not know what they studied; however,
it may also be true that they did not really study the material enough for
it to be considered learned in the first place. They might not have
remembered much more immediately after study than they did later.
Just because people sat through a lecture or ran their eyes over a
textbook does not necessarily mean that they learned. If they were not
paying attention, then the later recall failure (such as a flunked test) is
due to the fact that they never learned the material in the first place.
This is one problem with cramming as a study method (see chapter 6),
and is also one reason why students might not be able to "remember"
what they studied when they were watching television, listening to their
stereo headset, or in the midst of other distractions. Research has found
that attention to learning tasks correlates more highly with school
achievement than does amount of time spent on the task.31
The failure to pay attention may be the most common reason for
"forgetting" the names of people we meet. Frequently when we are
introduced to someone we are not really paying attention; we never
really get the name in the first place. We are waiting for our own name
to be said or trying to think of something to say to the person. Thus,
one way to reduce the problem of forgetting names is to make a special
effort to concentrate on the name.
The failure to pay attention is also a common reason for absentmindedness. Usually when you forget where you parked your car or left your
umbrella it is because you were not consciously paying attention to what
you were doing when you parked the car or put your umbrella down.
Your mind was on something else. Thus, one way to reduce absentmindedness is to pay attention to what you are doing. You might even tell
yourself as you put the umbrella on the store counter, "I am putting the

How to Remember Almost Anything: Basic

Principles•

61

umbrella on the store counter." This will focus your attention on what
you are doing and reduce the likelihood that you will walk off and forget
it. Names and absentmindedness are discussed further in chapters 13
and 14.
Attention is the last of the basic principles discussed in this chapter,
but it is certainly not the least. In fact, none of the other principles can
be applied if attention is not. You cannot make material meaningful,
organize it, associate it, or visualize it if you do not get it in the first
place.

How to Remember Almost
Anything Else:
More Basic Principles

C

hapter 4 discussed some of the principles of learning and memory
that serve as a foundation for learning almost any kind of material..
This chapter continues with some more basic principles that can also be
used to help remember almost anything: repetition, relaxation, context,
interest, and feedback.

REPETITION: "WHAT WAS THAT AGAIN?"
Almost everyone knows the importance of repetition. We might be able
to learn a few things thefirsttime through (if they are short and simple),
but most learning requires repeating the material over and over. Of
course, repetition does help learning, but some people do not realize
that although repetition is necessary for learning it is not sufficient for
most learning. That is, you must repeat most material to learn it, but
just repeating it does not guarantee that you will learn it; repetition
should be combined with other principles of learning to be effective.1
The examples illustrating the importance of attention in chapter 4
show that repeated exposure to something is not sufficient to learn it.
The insufficiency of repetition alone is also illustrated by the story of the
young boy who used the phrase "I have went" in a paper he wrote in
school. The teacher made him stay after school and write on the board
62

How to Remember Almost Anything Else

63

100 times, "I have gone." She told him that when he finished he could go
home, and then she went to a'faculty meeting. When she returned to the
classroom later she found "I have gone" written 100 times on the board,
and scrawled at the end of it was "I have finished, so I have went."
Another example of the inadequacy of repetition is the experience of
Professor Edmund Sanford, who had read a morning prayer at least
5,000 times over a period of 25 years and could read it almost automatically with a minimum of attention, but still could not recite it from
memory.2
What about continued repetition after you have learned something?
Suppose you reach the point in your study where you can say your poem
or your speech once without any mistakes. You may think that you have
learned it now so you might as well stop studying; further study would
be inefficient. This is not true. Overlearning, which is continued learning
beyond the point of bare mastery or of mere recall, has been shown to
be effective in strengthening learning and improving retrieval speed.3
Three groups of people memorized a list of nouns. One group quit
studying as soon as they could recall the list perfectly once (0-percent
overlearning). The second group continued to study the list for half as
many trials as they had needed to reach one perfect recall of the list (50percent overlearning). The third group continued to study the list for as
many trials as they had needed to reach one perfect recall (100-percent
overlearning). For example, if it took 10 repetitions to reach the criterion,
the second group studied the list for 5 more repetitions, and the third
group studied the list for 10 more repetitions. Memory for the lists was
measured by recall and relearning at various intervals from 1 to 28 days
later. The greater the degree of overlearning, the better the memory at
all time intervals, although the improvement from 0-percent to 50percent overlearning was greater than the improvement from 50-percent
to 100-percent overlearning.4
Overlearning shows one reason why cramming for an exam does
not result in retention of the material for very long after the exam: You
have barely learned the material so it is forgotten quickly. You have
probably had the experience of going in to take an exam that you have
crammed for with the feeling that lots of facts arefloatingaround in your
head but none of them is really tied down or fully learned. You just hope
the teacher asks the questions in therightway. Then the teacher comes
in and has some business to conduct before handing out the exams, and
you are wishing he would hurry so that you can start writing down
answers immediately before you forget too much. You can almost "feel"
your knowledge running out your ears and piling up on the floor around
you where it will not do you any good. This feeling of underlearning
accompanies most cramming.

64

YOUR MEMORY

In a study of people's memory for names and faces of high school
colleagues, the relatively high level of recall (40 percent even after 48
years) was attributed by the researchers in part to overlearning: People
learned most of their colleagues' names very thoroughly.5 Overlearning
also accounts for the fact that you can still remember some things you
learned as a child (the multiplication tables, the alphabet, how to ride a
bicycle), even though you may not have used them for a long time.
Not only does overlearning help you remember material better but
it can give you more confidence that you really do know the material.
People learned a list in which various items were acquired to a criterion
of either one correct recall, two correct recalls, or four correct recalls.
Four weeks later they had a recall test, and then rank-ordered the
nonrecalled items in terms of how well they felt they knew them. They
then had a recognition test on the nonrecalled items. Both their recall
and their confidence in how well they knew the nonrecalled items
increased with how much they had overlearned them.6
Repetition can result not only in more learning (and more confidence)
but can result in different kinds of learning when studying technical and
unfamiliar information. In one study learners appeared to notice the main
conceptual framework as they repeated unfamiliar technical material, so
that repetitions helped transform the material into more meaningful
ideas. Verbatim learning actually decreased over repetitions, while problem-solving skills and the ability to transfer learning increased.7
RELAXATION: "TAKE IT EASY"
Have you ever taken a test where you just could not remember the
answers to some questions, but right after you turned the test in and
relaxed the answers came flowing into your mind? Have you ever
forgotten what you had prepared to say when you stood up in front of a
group of people to give a speech or report? (As one speaker said,
"Friends, just before I stood up to speak to you, only God and I knew
what I was going to say; now only God knows.") Have you ever lived
through or witnessed a disaster, such as a fire or accident, and found
later that you remembered very little about it or did not remember it
accurately?
These are examples of the kinds of situations that can cause
stress—situations where you are under time pressure or pressure to
perform well, where lots of people are watching you, or where physical
danger or pain is involved. Any kind of stressful situation that gives rise
to strong emotional arousal (especially negative emotions such as anxiety, fear, embarrassment, nervousness, and worry) can interfere with

How to Remember Almost Anything Else

65

your ability to learn and remember. The negative emotion that has been
studied most often in connection with memory is anxiety.8
Even stressful situations that are not directly related to the memory
task itself (for example, divorce, death of a close friend, loss of a job)
can hinder learning and memory. Young adults (in their twenties) reported that most memory problems occurred when they were under
stress.9 in fact, anxiety can interfere "with memory even without a
specific stressful situation being involved; people "with a high general
anxiety level (who are generally anxious about life) tend to do ,worse in
memory tests than people with a low general anxiety level. One kind of
general anxiety level involves anxiety associated with any situation where
performance is being evaluated, such as taking tests in school. This is
called "test anxiety." Several scales have been developed to measure
test anxiety, and a lot of research has been done on it.
The relationship between memory and anxiety, whether situationspecific anxiety or more general anxiety, is not a simple one. A little
anxiety can help memory, but beyond a certain level, continued increasing anxiety hinders memory. For example, the person who does not care
at all about his next exam or an upcoming speech is not likely to do too
well on it; the person who is moderately anxious about his performance
will probably do better; but the person who feels excessive amounts of
anxiety will probably not be as able to prepare effectively or to recall
during the exam or speech.
Although it is well documented that high anxiety often interferes
with performance, exactly why or how it does so is not yet clear. Some
problems may be caused by narrowing the focus of attention; high stress
and anxiety may cause a person to not pay adequate attention to things
outside of himself, and thus miss information necessary for accurate
memory. There is also some evidence that anxiety can cause problems
in encoding (reading) material, in organizing it (when studying or reviewing), and in retrieving it during an exam. Some research on test anxiety
has suggested that it causes three sources of interference in recall: (1)
worry—cognitive concern about one's performance (such as performance
consequences and comparison to others); (2). emotionality—self-perceived arousal of negative feelings (physiological arousal); and (3) task
interference—tendency to be distracted by task irrelevancies (for example, inability to leave unsolved problems and preoccupation with time
limits). The source of interference that appears to be the most important
in influencing memory is worry.10
Whatever the reasons are for why or how anxiety affects memory,
an important practical question is, what can we do about it? There are
two approaches you can take to help you deal with anxiety—cure it or

66

YOUR MEMORY

prevent it. A cure for anxiety is to learn and use relaxation techniques
like meditation to calm your mind, and muscle relaxation techniques to
calm your body. Elderly people who were taught a mnemonic technique
for remembering names and faces were able to use the mnemonic more
effectively after they had relaxation training. In athletic performance,
relaxation enhances ability to focus attention on critical aspects of a
situation—to discriminate the important features of the performance and
generate useful images to mentally practice them.11
There are steps you can take to prevent anxiety from arising in
addition to attacking the anxiety directly with relaxation techniques.
Generally, the better prepared you are for the exam or the performance,
the less anxious you will feel. This means extensive practice for*a skill
performance, and overlearning for a recall peformance. We have seen
that overlearning increases your confidence in your ability to remember,
and increased confidence helps reduce anxiety.12 Anxiety is more likely
to interfere with your memory for material that you have just barely
learned than with material that is well learned.
In addition to overlearning, improving your learning and recall skills
can also increase your confidence and reduce anxiety. Of course, improved skills in learning and recall are not relevant just to formal school
settings, but that is the area in which most research has been done, in
the form of study skills and test-taking skills. For example, research has
found that learning effective study skills can reduce test anxiety, and that
students who experience high test anxiety benefit most from a course
on learning strategies.13 In another study students were taught testtaking strategies, such as concentrating on only one test item at a time,
marking harder items to return to later, and giving themselves instructions that are used by effective test takers (for example, "I have plenty
of time—read the questions carefully")- These students performed
better on a later test than did other students who had practiced taking
similar tests or who were taught relaxation techniques. The students
who learned test-taking skills also reported that they thought less often
during the test about their level of ability, about how hard each item was,
and about how poorly they were doing. They also had better cumulative
grades the next term. The researchers suggested that so-called test
anxiety may not even be an anxiety-based problem as much as a problem
in ineffective test taking as a result of deficient test-taking skills.14
Sometimes you cannot remember something right at the time you
need it, even though you know that you know it. Something else keeps
intruding. This is a "mental block." You may temporarily block on the
name of a goodfriendwhen you start to introduce her, or on the answer
to a test question that you studied thoroughly. Stress is afrequentcause
of mental blocks; you are more likely to block when you are under

How to Remember Almost Anything Else

67

pressure. In addition to the above techniques for overcoming anxiety,
abandoning the search for a while has been found to help overcome
mental blocks; quit trying to recall that item. Often one of two things will
happen. First, when you come back to the item later it may come right
to your memory immediately, because you are more relaxed and not
trying so hard. Second, the item may just pop into your mind when you
are thinking about something else.15

CONTEXT: "WHERE AM I?"
Although most of the basic principles deal with what you learn or how
you learn, context deals with where you learn. Context refers to the
situation, surroundings, environment, or setting in which learning and
recall occur. The essence of the context effect is that if you learn
something in a particular context, you can recall it better in the same
context than in a different context. Presumably, contextual features
become associated with material being learned, and can serve as cues
later for recall. Studies have found the context effect in diverse examples
ranging from thefindingthat material learned under water in a diver's
suit is later recalled better in the diver's suit under water than on the
beach, to thefindingthat material learned standing up or lying down is
remembered better in the same posture in which it was learned than in
the other posture.16
The interest of most people in context effects is in less exotic,
more everyday settings than learning under water in a diver's suit. For
students, being tested in the same room as the study room has been
found to aid recall, as compared with being tested in a different room.
Even imagining the study room when being tested in a different room
restored some of the contextual cues and helped recall. The effects of
context are enhanced by purposely associating the learned material to a
feature of the room; in fact, one study found that the same context
resulted in better recall only when such an association was made. It has
been hypothesized that the context serves as a memory landmark when
it becomes associated with the learned material, and that such landmarks
can later be generated from memory and used to guide retrieval of the
material.17
Research has also found that learning different word lists in several
different rooms produced better recall on a comprehensive test of all the
lists than did learning them all in the same room, when the test was in a
new room. It was hypothesized that studying in different rooms gives
variability in contextual cues and allows for moreflexibilityin retrieval,
so that the learners are not so context bound.18

68

YOUR MEMORY

How can you use the research on context effects? There are at
least four possibilities:
1. Practice in the same place where you will perform, so that all
the contextual cues that were present in practice will be there during
performance. For students this means studying each subject in the
classroom where the exam will be given. For other learning tasks, such
as a speech, delivering lines for a play, or a musical performance, it
means practicing-in the hall or on the stage where you will be performing.
2. When the first strategy is not possible, practice in settings that
are as similar as possible to the setting where you will perform. For
example, studying in a similar classroom, or even in the library, would
be better than studying out on the lawn. Similarly, practicing your speech
standing behind the kitchen table would probably simulate thefinalsetting
better than practicing while lying in bed.
3. Use the context effect while you are taking the exam. When you
cannot remember an answer, try to recall the conditions in which you
studied that material. For example, if you were in a library study room
when you read a chapter, imagine yourself there and some mental
context cues might help. We saw in chapter 4 that people who try to
remember the names of school classmates after many years often find
this imagining approach helpful as they try to mentally reconstruct scenes
from school days and then name the people present. Besides imagining
the learning context during recall, you can also benefit by imagining the
recall context during learning. Mental rehearsal of speeches, reports, or.
musical performances can involve imagining the context in which you will
be performing as you are practicing. Much research on performance in
sports has found that such mental practice helps.19
4. "Immunize" against contextual changes beforehand. This approach applies when you know that you will be tested in a different
context or when you do not know what the context will be for the test.
Study the material or practice the performance in several different
contexts to avoid being dependent on one context for recall. This should
give you moreflexibilityin any retrieval that is affected by contextual
cues. One study found that varying the learning contexts helped memory
for information students learned in a minicourse in statistics. This
strategy also helps brain-damaged patients relearn activities so that they
can transfer to home and everyday life outside the hospitals. The patients
practice the new skills in as many different environments as possible.
Ideally, the environments should resemble the eventual environment in
which they will be living, but if that is not possible then practice in a wide
range of hospital contexts is better than in a single situation.20

How to Remember Almost Anything Else

69

These four ways to use the context effect all deal with improving
memory for what you studied. If your problem lies more in making
yourself study than in remembering what you study, you might use
context in another way. Have at least one place where you do nothing
but study (no food, radios, games, television, friends, etc.). Studying
will become associated with that place, and when you go to that study
area it will be easier to get something done.
This section on context has focused so far on effects of the physical
environment. In addition to physical context, learning and memory can
also be affected by "psychological" context and "material" context.
Psychological context is an internal rather than external context; research has found that people can remember information better when
they are in the same drug state or same mood as when they learned it.
(This applies even to the effects of alchohol, caffeine, and nicotine.)
Material context refers to the kind of material that surrounds the material
to be learned. Words or pictures learned in the context of other words
(as in a sentence or list) or other pictures are recalled better if the other
context words or pictures are present during recall.21
Learners can become too context bound in terms of material context
just as they can for physical context. Students often complain that they
knew their notes and the book by heart, but did not do well on the test
because they were unable to relate the questions to their notes. If
allowed to reproduce their notes instead, they could do so, even telling
where on the page the answer to a question is located. Bsrhaps they
know the material too well: It is overly tied to a particular context. This
may be one reason why word problems in math are difficult for many
people.22 For example, many children who can easily handle a problem
like "9 - 3 = 6" may have trouble when the problem is embedded in a
context like "If John has nine marbles, and gives three to hisfriendJoe,
how many marbles will he have left?"
It should be noted that context effects can vary with the way
memory is measured, and that none of the context effects (physical,
psychological, or material) is as strong as the effects of using good study
skills or mnemonic techniques.23 Thus, any attempt to use context
effects to aid recall should not be done instead of using such skills and
techniques, but should be used in addition to them.
INTEREST: "WHAT'S IT TO YA?"
We saw how important attention is in chapter 4. Attention is influenced
by interest. You pay attention to the things you are most interested in;
thus, you are most likely to remember those things. If something is not

70

YOUR MEMORY

important to you, you are not very likely to remember it. Any two people
who walk through a department store, read a restaurant menu, or read
a book are likely to remember differentthings because of their different
interests. The influence of interest on attention and memory is illustrated
by the story of the returning serviceman who was greeted at the airport
by his girlfriend. He casually mentioned as the attractive stewardess
walked by, "That's Laura Nelson." His girlfriend asked him how he
happened to know her name. "Oh," he said, "the names of all the crew
members were posted at the front of the plane." She stumped him with
the next question: "What was the pilot's name?"24
The value of interest in memory may be illustrated by comparing
two people who are studying French. Suppose that one of them is
planning to take a trip to France in a few months. Other things being
equal, which one would be more likely to learn and remember the
French? Similarly, suppose you are introduced to two people, and one of
them borrows $5 from you. Which person's name are you more likely to
remember? Or suppose you have been told that pericholecystitis is an
inflammation of tissue around the gall bladder. You may not remember
this fact. But suppose that you were told by your doctor that you have
pericholecystitis. Now wouldn't you be much more likely to remember
it? These simple examples show that you tend to remember the things
that interest you.
Some people complain that they are "just no good" at such subjects
as math or mechanics. Frequently the reason for this is that they have
no interest in those subjects; they see no value in them and thus have
not, and do not want to, put forth effort to learn them.25 Women who
claim to have bad memories may be able to remember the birthdays and
anniversaries that their husbands have a hard time keeping track of, or
may be able to describe in detail what other women at a party were
wearing. Boys who cannot seem to learn in school may be able to tell
you everything you want to know (and more) about sports or cars. The
reason is simply interest.
Interest is one possible reason why some adults, especially the
elderly, may find it hard to learn and remember new information. Many
elderly people are more interested in the past than they are in the
present or future, and spend more time thinlcing about the past. When
you go to visit your parents or grandparents, anyone in their seventies
or older, what do they talk about? Do they talk about current events or
future plans? Not usually. Most of the time they talk more about past
experiences and family history. That is what they are more interested
in, so they may have a hard time remembering new things they learn.
It was suggested in chapter 4 that one reason some people fail to

How to Remember Almost Anything Else

71

remember names is that they do not pay attention to them. We may take
this one step further and suggest that one reason they pay little attention
to names is that most people are not as interested in other people as
they are in themselves. (When you look at a picture of a group of people
that includes you, who do you look at first?) Most people are more
interested in what they are going to say, or in what the other person will
think of them, than they are in the other person.
Two ways in which interest helps in memory have been suggested
so far: It helps us pay attention and it motivates us to try to remember.
Another way interest helps memory is that -people spend more time
thinking about things that interest them than they do thinking about
things that do not interest them, and we have seen that repetition aids
learning.
The importance of interest can be illustrated by referring again to
the 12-digit number that has been used to illustrate several points: 376315-374-264. You may not have learned this number by now. It is not
especially easy to learn, but more important you see no reason for doing
so. Therefore, you are not motivated to learn it. But I did not make up
that number from nowhere; I have been using that particular number on
purpose. If you memorize that number you will in effect have the calendar
for all of 1988 memorized (you can do the same for any other year with
the appropriate 12-digit number). You will be able to answer questions
like "What day of the week is June 18?" "How many Mondays are in
November?" or "What date is the second Sunday in April?" Now are you
interested? Do you think you could learn the number? Having a reason
for learning it may have increased interest, which will make it easier to
learn. Chapter 7 describes how the number can be used.
The principle of interest suggests that you should increase your
interest in certain things if you having trouble learning and remembering
them. A natural question is, how? If you are not interested in something
it probably will not work just to say to yourself, "From now on I am going
to be interested in that." One way to develop an interest in something
you need to learn is to try to find ways to relate it to your present
motives and interests. Try to find some use for the material. Homemakers who have a difficult time in math may be able to learn it better if they
can see some ways to use the information to make measurements in
cooking and sewing. Carpenters who have a hard time learning math may
improve if they can see how it will help them be faster and more accurate
in their carpentry work. Salespeople who have a hard time remembering
names may be able to improve if they can realize how important people's
names are to them, and how remembering customers' names can help
sales.

72

YOUR MEMORY

It might help to realize that virtually every subject is interesting to
someone. Try tofigureout what it is that someone may find interesting
about the material you are learning. Do not depend on authors, speakers,
or teachers to make books, lectures, or courses interesting. If you
actively seek for something of interest and bring an inquiring mind to
your learning, you will find most learning more interesting than if you
just passively depend on the provider of the material to entertain you.
In addition to developing interest internally, you might also be able
to stimulate interest externally or artificially. External motivations, such
as rewards or punishments, may help create interest. For example, you
might put off a pleasant task until a certain learning goal is achieved.
FEEDBACK: "HOW ARE YOU DOING?"
Suppose you are shooting with a rifle at a target that is too far away for
you to see where you hit. You take a total of 50 shots without ever
looking at the target to see where they are hitting, so that you have no
idea how you are doing. How interesting would this kind of target practice
be? How much do you think you would improve? On the other hand,
looking through a spotting scope after every few shots would not only
help maintain your interest in what you are doing but would also give you
information about how you are doing so that you could make adjustments
to improve.
Feedback in learning serves the same two functions. First, knowing
how you are progressing in learning something helps sustain your
interest in the task. You will soon grow bored and lose interest if you
constantly study and never know whether you are remembering any of
the material. First-grade children were taught to rehearse material to
help them remember it. Some of them were given feedback on how well
it worked and others were not. When later given the option of rehearsing,
only those who had received feedback on its value persisted in using it.
Second, you will be able to make adjustments to improve if you get
feedback on how much you can remember. You can correct your recall
errors and put more effort into the parts you cannot remember.26
Feedback can help you learn and remember material better. Some
people were tested on written material right after theyfinishedreading
it. Half of them received feedback as to how they did on the test, and
the other half received no feedback. The people who received feedback
remembered the material better a week later than did the people who
did not receive feedback.27 Research shows that students in school learn
more efficiently when teachers provide corrective feedback during prac-

How to Remember Almost Anything Else

73

tice and application, and a whole program of instruction has been based
on feedback from teachers to students.28
In addition to helping you learn material better, feedback can
increase your accuracy in assessing how well you know the material.
Some people studied a list of paired associates for several trials, alternating study trials with test trials (which gave them feedback on how well
they were learning the materials). Others had the study trials only,
without the practice tests. Thefirstgroup was more accurate in predicting how well they would do on afinalrecall test.29
You can apply the principle of feedback by using any technique that
gives you information about how you are doing. One method is to study
with a friend and quiz each other. Another method is recitation (see
chapter 6). Recitation in effect involves testing yourself. If you are
memorizing a poem or learning a speech, then try saying it to yourself
after a few readings and look at it only when you get stuck. If you are
studying a chapter, then glance at the headings and words in italics and
try to explain to yourself what they mean. You might even make up test
questions. This gives you feedback on how you are doing. It will help
you to sustain your interest and make adjustments to improve your
learning.

Strategies for Effective
Learning: Study Skills

A

number of strategies can help you learn and remember more
effectively: Take steps to reduce interference; space your learning
sessions out over time; use whole learning and part learning in appropriate circumstances; recite the material; and use a study system. Each of
these learning strategies is discussed in this chapter. These strategies
are the kinds of skills that are typically covered in books or courses on
study skills in school. Most such books and courses also cover some of
the principles in chapters 4 and 5, as well as school skills that are not
covered in this book (for example, goal setting, managing time, taking
exams, writing papers).1
The strategies in this chapter are discussed from the viewpoint of
students in school, and can help students develop better study skills.
(The quality of a student's study is more important than the quantity of
study, good students do not necessarily study more than poor students,
but they use their study time more effectively.) Poor students are not
the only ones who can benefit from improved study skills. Research has
found that most students in high school and college use a narrow range
of learning strategies over a wide range of learning materials and
objectives, and that good students know very little about effective
strategies to better learn and remember even though they use more
strategies than poor students.2
74

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

75

Although this chapter focuses on students in school, the scope of
the chapter is broader than just the school setting. In research on
learning strategies, a "learner" includes any person who is trying to
acquire new knowledge or skills in formal school settings, on-the-job
training, or informal learning.3 Learning strategies will help not only in
remembering material for exams but also in many other tasks, such as
remembering names of people you meet,, learning a foreign language,
learning a speech or report, or memorizing scriptures, poems, songs, or
lines for a play. Thus, even if you are not currently in school you will still
find that you can use these learning strategies. One of the students'
comments included in the introduction to this book was written by a
middle-aged woman in my memory course: "I honestly did not think any
of this memory business would be of help to me now that I am out of
school, but it really has."
REDUCE INTERFERENCE
In chapter 3 we saw that interference from other learning is one of the
main causes of forgetting. What factors affect interference and what can
you do about them?
How Well the Material Is Learned
The more thoroughly something is learned, the less it will be affected by
interference.4 Material that is just barely learned is more subject to
interference than is material that is learned very well; thus, if you want
to remember something, overlearn it (see chapter 5).
Meaningfulness of the Material
The more meaningful the material is, the less subject it is to interference.
This does not mean that interference occurs only with meaningless
material like nonsense syllables (which have been used in much of the
research on interference). Interference can also occur with meaningful
prose,5 but the effects of interference are generally not as great for
meaningful material as for less meaningful material. Any of the principles
you can use from chapter 4 to make the material meaningful will help
reduce interference.
Amount of Intervening Activity
How much you do, especially in terms of mental activity, during the
period between the time of learning and the time of recall can affect

76

YOUR MEMORY

interference. Generally, the more you do, the more opportunity there is
for interference to occur. Suppose one student studied for an exam, and
then went to a movie, read the newspaper, read a magazine, and studied
another subject before the exam. Suppose a second student studied for
the exam, and then slept or rested until the exam. Other things being
equal, there would be more interference for thefirststudent than for the
second. Minimum interference should occur if you sleep between studying and testing (assuming you studied well and are not sleeping instead
of studying). As we saw in chapter 3, there is research evidence that a
person who goes to sleep right after learning will remember more than a
person who stays awake. One study found that even three-month-old
infants showed a positive correlation between how well they remembered
a simple motor task (moving an overhead crib mobile by kicking) and
how much they slept during the 8 hours after learning; the researchers
attributed the correlation to the amount of intervening activity.6
Similarity of Intervening Activity
The previous item referred to how much you do between learning and
recall. What you do can also affect interference. Two kinds of information
that are similar will interfere with each other more than two that are
dissimilar.7 Therefore, if you cannot sleep all the time after study (to
reduce the amount of intervening activity), then you should do something
that is different from what you have studied (to reduce the similarity of
intervening activity). It is best not to study two similar subjects close
together when you can help it. For example, if you had to study French,
Spanish, and biology in the next few days, it would be better to study
biology in between French and Spanish. French and Spanish are more
similar, and thus more likely to interfere with each other. (Of course, a
student who has tests in French and Spanish on Friday and has not
studied either one by Thursday night may not have much choice.)
Similarity of Learning Contexts
The context in which you learn something affects your ability to remember it. For example, you are more likely to recognize a person you have
met only once, and to remember her name, if you see her in the office
where you first met her rather than if you see her walking down the
street. Similarly, other recall will be helped if it occurs in the same
context in which the material was learned (see chapter 5). The contexts
in which you study different subjects can also make a difference in how
much they interfere with each other. For example, studying two different
subjects in two different rooms instead of in the same room can reduce

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

77

the interference between the subjects by as much as half. It has even
been found that it is easier to keep straight which of two speakers said
what if the speakers are observed in different places.8
The practical implication of the context effect is that if you need to
study subjects that are likely to interfere with each other, you should
study them in different places. For example, having one place to study
your French and another place to study your Spanish will help you keep
the two subjects separate when you recall them. When teachers teach
two different sections of the same class covering the same subject matter
during one semester, a common problem is that they cannot remember
what they talked about in one section and what they talked about in the
other section. I find that it helps me to teach the sections in different
rooms rather than in the same room.
In addition to different places of study, you can also create different
contexts for the materials to be learned. For example, you could write
your French notes in blue ink and your Spanish notes in black ink, or
write your French vocabulary words on the top half of each page and
your Spanish words on the bottom half. When you try to recall them
later, the color of the ink or the location on the page will help you keep
straight which language is which.
Time Between Learning Sessions
If you have more than one subject to study, you may have less interference if you study each one in a separate study session rather , than
studying all subjects in one session. Some people learned two pairedassociate lists on Thursday and were tested on the second one on Friday.
Others learned the first list on Monday and the second one on Thursday,
and were also tested on the second one on Friday. The first group
recalled 38 percent; the second group recalled 65 percent. In a similar
study, people learned four different sets of words paired to the same cue
words and then recalled the fourth set later. This situation is also very
susceptible to interference. Some of the people studied all four sets in
one session; others studied them on a spaced-out basis over a period of
three days. Those who did all their studying in one session could recall
only 31 percent of the fourth set of words after one day, and 7 percent
after a week. Those who had learned the four lists separately in the
spaced schedule recalled 89 percent after one day, 72 percent after a
week, and 34 percent after a month.9
What if you do not have several days? Suppose you have to know the
material tomorrow. It will still help to take a break. The time between
study sessions does not have to be very long. Merely going to get a drink
of water between two learning sessions has been found to reduce

78

YOUR MEMORY

interference. (In fact, taking such a break and coming back to the same
room reduced interference as much as going to a different room for the
second session.)10 Suppose, for example, that you need to study two
similar subjects, such as French and Spanish, for 2 hours in one night.
You could study French and Spanish intermittently for 20 to 30 minutes
at a time during the 2 hours; or you could study French for 1 hour, take
a short break, and then study Spanish for 1 hour. The second strategy is
preferable.
SPACE IT OUT
Suppose you have allotted a certain amount of time to studying some
material. Should you do all of your studying in one session, or should you
distribute your study time across shorter time periods? For example, if
you can allot 3 hours to study the material, you could either spend one
3-hour session studying it or you could space it out over three 1-hour
sessions.
The first strategy will be easily identified as "cramming" by almost
anyone who has been a student. Cramming consists of trying to learn a
large amount of material in a relatively short period of intense study,
usually just before the exam. Psychologists call it "massed learning."
They call the second strategy "distributed learning." Distributed learning
is what most teachers tell students to do but what few students actually
do—probably because they do not start studying for a test far enough
ahead to be able to space their study. They study by the "brush-fire"
method, stamping the fire out wherever itflamesup, with little planning
ahead. This is one reason why most books on how to study in school
include a chapter on budgeting your time.
In the previous section on time between learning sessions, we saw
that spacing of study sessions helps reduce interference among different
sets of material. How effective is spacing in terms of efficiency in learning
one set of material? Quotations from three sources that summarize the
relevant research can answer this question. The first quote is from a
review of research on memory. "Spaced repetitions almost always benefit
memory more than massed repetitions... . [There is] a beneficial effect
of greater spacing between learning trials under many circumstances."
The second quote is from a textbook on memory: "One of the most
potent variables influencing forgetting is spaced practice. " u
The third quote isfroma booklet titled What Works: Research About
Teaching and Learning, which was published by the U.S. Department of
Education in 1986. It summarizes 41 "findings" of educational research
for parents and teachers. Each of the 41findingsis a strategy or activity

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

79

that has substantial research support and that could be followed by a
home or school educator to enhance student learning. The booklet has
been well received by most educators, and several of its-findings are
noted in this book. One of the "examples of sound study practices" listed
in What Works is, "Good students space learning sessions on a topic over
time and do not cram or study the same topic continuously."12
As the above quotes suggest, research evidence indicates that
spaced learning is generally more effective than massed learning for a
number of different kinds of learning tasks, and for intervals between
study and recall from a few seconds to much longer. Three studies
illustrate the variety of the research. In the first study, high school
students studied French vocabulary words 10 minutes each day for three
days. Other students studied the words during one 30-minute period.
Their performance on a test immediately after studying was the same,
but the distributed study group did better four days later. In the second
study, postmen in Britain were taught to type on a new postal-code
keyboard. Some practiced two 2-hour sessions per day; some practiced
one 2-hour session or two 1-hour sessions per day, and some practiced
one 1-hour session per day. The more spaced their training was, the
less practice time it took to learn the keyboard and the greater the
subsequent rate of improvement. In the third study, people who had
studied Spanish for three years by both spaced and massed study when
they were in school retained about 72 percent of the vocabulary up to 50
years later; those who relied only on cramming typically retained less
than 10 percent.13
In addition to benefiting study, research evidence shows that spacing
may also benefit reviewing, improve teaching, and aid memory for names.
When reviewing material that was previously learned, it has been found
that spaced reviews are more effective than continuous reviews in helping
retention. Along with spaced study, spaced tests and spaced presentations of material by the teacher seem to make the most efficient use of
classroom time. We saw in chapter 5 that in a study of people's memory
for names and faces of former high school colleagues, the relatively high
level of recall was attributed in part to the effects of overlearning. The
other contributing factor suggested by the researcher was distributed
learning: We learn the other students' names over a period of four years.
You might have a hard time remembering the names of 10 people you
met in one evening, but you would do better if you met one of those
people each day for 10 days. Similarly, people who saw faces for three 5second viewings separated by several minutes to 2 hours remembered
the faces better than did people who saw the faces for one 15-second
viewing.14

80

YOUR MEMORY

There are at least three possible reasons why spaced learning is
generally better than massed learning.15
1. You can concentrate only so long before your attention wanders;
thus, if you try to do all your studying in one session, you may not be
able to pay attention for the whole time.
2. There is evidence that what you have learned during a study
session may consolidate in your mind during a break. You can help the
process along by consciously reviewing the material in your mind between study sessions. Students remembered more from a 21-minute
lecture when the lecture was broken up by three 2-minute pauses to
allow consolidation.
3. You are more likely to study the material in different contexts
and moods in several study sessions. Chances are better that the mood
and setting of the exam will be similar to at least one of the study
sessions. Even if it is not, you still have the advantage of being less
bound by context than if you had done all your studying in only one
context (see chapter 5).
Spaced learning reduces the amount of actual study time it takes to
learn the material. Of course, the total amount of time between the
beginning of study and final mastery increases with spaced learning,
because the total time consists both of actual study time and time
between study sessions. Thus, the student who starts studying for
Friday's exam on Wednesday will find it easier to space his study than
will the student who starts on Thursday night.
There is a limit to the improvements in performance with spacing.
As the length of the study session is decreased and the interval between
them is increased, performance improves to a point, and then declines.
For example, distributing your 3 hours of study into eighteen 10-minute
periods may be worse than cramming for one 3-hour period. A practical
problem is deciding what length is best for the study periods and for the
intervals between periods. It has been recommended that the study
period should be shorter for difficult tasks, young, inexperienced learners, and early stages of learning, than for easier tasks, more mature
learners, and tasks that are in an advanced stage of learning.16
Massed learning may be better for tasks that require a lot of
preparation or for certain problem-solving tasks. For example, if it takes
you 15 minutes of each study session to settle down, get your supplies
together, and get "warmed up" before you can actually start studying,
then it may not make much sense to divide your study time into 30minute sessions. Massed learning may also be more efficient if recall is

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

81

going to be required right after learning; distributed learning is usually
more efficient when there is a delay between learning and recall.17 (This
suggests one reason why many students are not able to recall material
for very long after an exam: They have learned it by cramming the night
before the exam.)
BREAK IT UP?
Another choice that you are faced with in learning material is whether
you should study it by the part method or by the whole method. In the
part method you break up the material into smaller parts, and study each
part (section, verse, paragraph, stanza, etc.) separately: Study the first
part until you have learned it, and then study the second part until you
have learned it, and then the third part, and so on. In the whole method
you study the whole thing from beginning to end, all the parts together,
over and over until you have learned it.
The following seven conditions can determine whether whole learning or part learning is more efficient.18
1. One of the main advantages of the whole method is that it gives
a context of meaning to each part and prompts recall of the next part.
This holds especially for material in which there is a developing theme
(for example, a poem or speech). Whole learning gives you an overall
picture of how the parts fit together, and this overview of the context
helps you to remember the material. Learning the parts without having
an overall picture of how they go together is somewhat like putting a
jigsaw puzzle together without looking at the picture on the box to see
what the completed puzzle is supposed to look like. In the part method,
putting the parts together will take up as much as half of the total learning
time and will be the source of most errors. Thus, the difficulty in the
part method is not learning the parts but putting them together.19
2. One of the main advantages of the part method is that people
get feedback on how much they are learning sooner than they do using
the whole method. You may not realize that you are learning anything if
you keep studying the whole thing over and over. However, the person
who is studying the separate parts may be able to recite each part as he
finishes it. He gets immediate feedback. If the whole learner keeps
studying, he will soonfindthat he can recite most of the material, but he
may give up before he reaches this point without feedback on progress
along the way. As we saw in chapter 5, feedback helps sustain interest.
For example, suppose that it takes a person an hour to memorize a
passage of 500 words, and that a 100-word portion of this passage

100 Y O U R M E M O R Y

requires only 9 minutes to memorize. After 9 minutes of study, part
learners have something to show for their efforts, whereas whole
learners may not be able to recall even a single sentence correctly. This
may discourage the whole learners and they may give up. For this
reason, the part method may be better for adults who are not used to
the whole method, and for children who need feedback to keep them
going.
3. Continued practice using the whole method will improve its
efficiency, whereas continued practice with the part method will not. Let
us consider further the above example of memorizing a 500-word passage. The first 9 minutes spent by the whole learner is not wasted, but
it is leading toward mastery. The part learner still has four parts left to
memorize and may forget some of each part while memorizing the
others. In addition, he still has to work on putting the parts together
(see number 1 above). People who have had practice using the whole
method realize these things, and that they are learning even though it
does not show yet. Because of past experience they know that even
though they may not be getting feedback for some time, thefinalresults
will probably justify their patience and endurance.
4. The more material there is to be learned, the more efficient the
part method will be. Incidentally, it may be helpful to note that regardless
of whether you use the whole or part method, a passage that is twice as
long as another requires more than twice as long to learn. For example,
in one study, a passage of 100 words required a total learning time of 9
minutes; 200 words required 24 minutes; 500 words required 65 minutes; and 1,000 words required 165 minutes.20 Thus, if it takes you 1
hour to master a 20-page chapter, it will probably take you more than 2
hours to master a 40-page chapter.
5. The more distinctive the parts are, the more efficient the part
method will be. For example, the part method may be more appropriate
for learning the constitutional amendments than for learning the Gettysburg Address.
6. The advantages of the whole method are greater for distributed
learning than for massed learning.
7. The more mature and intelligent the learner is, the more
efficient the whole method will be for him.
For much of your learning you would probably want to use a
combination of whole and part learning. For example, you might study by
the whole method, but select certain parts for extra study. Or you might
try using a compromise between the whole and part methods that has
been called the "whole-part-whole" method: You first go through the

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

83

whole thing once or twice, then break it up into logical parts and learn
them, and finally review the material as a whole. This method can be
very effective for long, difficult material.21
Another combination method is the "progressive part" method: You
learn the first part and then the second part, and then study thefirsttwo
parts together. After you know the first two parts, you learn the third
part and then study all three parts together, and so on. The progressive
part method has an advantage over the part method in that you connect
the parts together as you learn them, rather than learning them as
disconnected parts. It has an advantage over the whole method in that
you get feedback to realize that you are really learning something. The
progressive part method may be particularly helpful for older adults;
forgetting takes place during learning, and because many elderly people
need more trials than young adults do to learn something, they are likely
to forget more while they are learning large amounts of material. The
progressive part method may reduce this effect.22
RECITE IT
Reciting means repeating to yourself what you have studied without
looking at it. In recitation you recall as much of what you are trying to
memorize as you can, looking at the material only when necessary, after
you have read it once or twice. For example, if you are studying a book
chapter, you might look at the headings and try to tell yourself what they
are about; if you are studying a poem, you might look at the first few
words of each line or stanza and try to recall the rest; if you are studying
a foreign language, you might look at each English word and try to recall
the foreign word. Talking to yourself out loud is not necessary, but it
may be better than just repeating material in your mind because it forces
you to pay more attention.
Suppose you have 2 hours to study a textbook chapter that takes a
half-hour to read. Would it be more effective to read it 4 times or to read
it once or twice and spend the rest of the time reciting, testing yourself,
and rereading to clear up the points you could not recall? Thefindingsof
several studies suggest that it would be more effective to spend as much
of the time as possible reciting.
For example, in one study students read an 800-word passage
containing 10 paragraphs. Students who recited after each paragraph
performed better on a recall test than students who reread the whole
passage again (however, the reciting took about twice as long as rereading). In a second study people listened to eight lists of 5 words each.
Some of them then listened to each list 3 more times and others recalled

84

YOUR MEMORY

(recited) each list 3 times, for the same total amount of study time. They
were then tested by recognizing the words from a larger list of 160
words. There was no significant difference between the two groups after
10 minutes, but after 48 hours the recitation group performed better.
Recitation can also give you feedback on how well you know the material
so that you can focus your study time on what you do not know as well.23
One reason recitation is so effective is that it forces you to use
many of the other principles and strategies discussed in chapters 4, 5,
and 6. For example, recitation forces active learning, it gives you
feedback on how you are doing, it involves repetition, and it forces you
to pay attention to what you are doing.
Also, in reciting you are practicing the very thing that will be
required of you later—recall. You are actually rehearsing retrieval or
testing yourself. In several studies, people who were given a test on
material right after reading it remembered it better a week or two later
than did people who were not given the test, and better even than people
who spent the same amount of time reviewing the material. These
results are due in part to the fact that the test groups had practiced
retrieving the material. Even young children can benefit by an immediate
test as a review.24
The effectiveness of some of the strategies in this chapter is affected
by various conditions, such as the kind of material learned or who is
doing the learning. The effectiveness of recitation does not depend on
whether the learners are dull or bright, whether the material is long or
short, or whether the material is meaningful or not; in virtually every
case it is more efficient to read and to recite than to just read. One
recent book on study skills said, "No principle is more important than
recitation for transferring material from the short-term memory to the
long-term memory," and a memory textbook said, "The importance of
practicing retrieval activities cannot be overemphasized. "25
If recitation is so helpful, why don't more people do it? Why do
some people spend all of their study time reading the material over and
over? There are at least two possible reasons. First, some people
probably do not realize the value of recitation. Second, recitation takes
more work than reading. It is easier to let your eyes wander down the
page (while your mind may be wandering somewhere else) than to
concentrate on trying to recall what you have read.
Of course, recitation can be done by yourself, but you can also use
recitation by studying with another person. You ask the other person
questions about the material to give her a chance to rehearse retrieval,
and then she does the same for you: Not only do you benefit by

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

85

answering questions but your recall will also benefit from making up
questions to ask the other person.26
USE A STUDY SYSTEM
An effective study method should:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Be based on the strategies for effective learning
Help you identify and understand the important parts of the material
Help you remember the important parts of the material
Be more efficient than merely reading the material over and over
Be easy to learn

Many study systems have been developed to meet these criteria.
The names of the systems are acronyms in which the first letters
represent the steps in each system. The following is a representative,
but not exhaustive, list of systems: SQ3R, OK4R, PQRST, OARWET,
PANORAMA, PQ4R, REAP, SQ5R, MURDER. I have selected SQ3R to
discuss as a typical study system for two reasons. First, it is the
granddaddy of study systems, dating from 1946.27 All of the others have
been developed since the 1960s (the next oldest being OK4R, which
dates from 1962). Second, most of the other systems are modifications
of SQ3R, containing essentially the same steps but dividing them up
differently and/or using different names for them.
SQ3R consists of five steps: Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review. It is a general-purpose system that combines several specific
learning strategies. It is used with large bodies of material (for example,
textbook chapters), and can be used in a wide range of tasks and content
areas. One textbook for teaching reading to high school students illustrates how SQ3R can be applied to content areas such as, English, social
studies (history), science, and math. The following is a brief description
of the SQ3R system based on more extensive discussions in books on
study skills.28
Survey
To survey a book, read the preface, table of contents, and chapter
summaries. To survey a chapter, study the outline and skim the chapter,
especially the headings, pictures, and graphs. Surveying consists of
getting an overview of what the book or chapter is about, and should not
take more than a few minutes. Many books have a summary at the end
of each chapter; reading this summary before you read the chapter may

86

YOUR MEMORY

help you get an overview. (In fact, reading a summary has even been
found to yield better memory for the main points of a chapter than
reading the chapter itself and similar results have been found in memory
for lectures.)29 The overview is somewhat like looking at a map before
taking a trip, or at a picture of thefinishedproduct before starting to put
together a jigsaw puzzle. Surveying gives a framework within which to
place the parts as you learn them, which not only can make the parts
easier to remember but also can speed up your reading time by allowing
you to comprehend the parts more rapidly.
Memory for reading material can be increased significantly merely
by giving the reader a short title reflecting the main idea of the material.
To illustrate the effect of knowing what a passage is about, read the
following passage once, then try to recall as much you can:
The procedure is actually quite simple. First you arrange things into different
groups. Of course, one pile may be sufficient depending on how much there is to
do. If you have to go somewhere else due to lack of facilities, that is the next
step; otherwise you are pretty well set. It is important not to overdo things.
That is, it is better to do too few things at once than too many. . . . After the
procedure is completed, arrange the materials into different groups again. They
can then be put in their appropriate places. Eventually they will be used once
more and the whole cycle will then have to be repeated.
Your recall of this passage was probably not too good because the
passage did not make much sense to you. Now I'll tell you that this
paragraph is about washing clothes. Try reading it again and see how
much better you understand it and remember it now that you have the
general idea of what it is about.30
"Advance organizers" are methods that give an introduction to, or
overview of, the material to be studied (for example, a summary or
outline to look over before studying). Research shows that they help in
learning and remembering reading material, for elderly adults as well as
younger adults. The reason authors of textbooks organize their material
under different chapters and headings is to tell the readers the main idea
of each chapter and section, how the material is put together, and how
the topics relate to each other. If you do not use the headings, you are
failing to take advantage of an important source for learning the material.
Using text headings can aid both in understanding and remembering
textbooks.31
The same holds true for pictures and graphs as for headings. The
reason pictures are included in a textbook is not just to take up space,
make the book thicker, or give the reader something to look at to break
up the monotony of reading. Rather, including pictures that illustrate

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

87

material in the text has been found in a number of studies to increase
learning of the text material.32
Question
Skim again, asking yourself questions based on the headings so that you
will know some things to look for when reading. For example, the
heading to this section—"Use a Study System"—may raise some questions: What constitutes this system? A system for what? How can I use
this system? Several studies have found that inserting written questions
before, within, or after text material helps in learning and remembering
the material, as do questions made up by the learner.33 Since most
material you read does not have questions inserted, you can benefit by
asking your own questions as your read. Questions can maintain interest,
focus attention, foster active involvement in learning, and give a purpose
to your reading, all of which help you to learn the material. Also, some
textbooks provide review questions at the end of the chapter; you might
try reading them before reading the chapter so that you will know what
to look for as you read the chapter.
Read
Read the chapter without taking notes. Answer the questions you have
asked. Read everything. Sometimes tables, charts, and graphs convey
more information than the text does. Note that this is the third step in
SQ3R; for most students it is thefirststep in studying. In fact, for some
students it is the only step: Some students think that when they have
run their eyes over the textbook they have studied it (after reading this
section on SQ3R one of my memory students commented that he used
the 3R method—read, read, and reread).
A student in one of my psychology courses came to talk with me
about her low quiz scores. She said she studied for the chapter quizzes,
but she just could not remember what she had studied. I asked her to
describe how she studied. She said, "Well, I read the chapter the night
before the quiz or the morning of the quiz." That was it—one reading,
no survey, no review. Reading was the only one of the SQ3R steps she
was using. I suggested to her that her problem was not in remembering
the material, but in learning it well enough in thefirstplace. She probably
could not have told me much more about the chapter right after reading
it than she could later on the quiz.
Underlining while reading is a very popular learning tactic among
high school and college students. Research on the effectiveness of

88

YOUR MEMORY

underlining shows that it can help people get more from their reading if
it is done right, but there are several ways that students can misuse
underlining.34 One misuse is to read a chapter and underline, and then
only review the underlined parts in studying for a test. One problem with
this approach is that you usually do not know what is important, or what
relates to what, the first time you read a chapter. Thus, when you
review the underlined parts you may miss much of what is important.
Underlining while you are reading for the first time also has other
problems. It is easy to do, so most students underline too much; this
results in reviewing pages that have marked not only the important points
but also repeated and conflicting points.
Another problem with underlining thefirsttime through is that some
students develop the habit of reading to mark important points rather
than reading to understand and remember the points; thus, a student
may underline an italicized sentence and continue reading without having
even read the italicized sentence! To use underlining properly, you should
wait until reaching the end of a section before underlining, think about
what the important points were, and then go back and underline only the
key phrases. Underlining the wrong things may actually interfere with
learning.35
Recite
Recitation is discussed as a separate strategy earlier in this chapter.
Reread, asking yourself questions about the headings and italicized words
and answering the questions as much as you can. This can be done after
each section or after each chapter, depending on their length. How much
of your study time should you spend reciting? For most textbooks about
half of your time should be spent reciting. You may want to spend more
time reciting for disconnected, meaningless material, such as lists of
rules and formulas, but somewhat less for storylike, connected material.
Review
Review is a very basic learning strategy that is often overlooked in
popular memory books. Some authors give the impression that if you
just use the right technique (theirs) to learn something, you will never
forget it. The fact is that no matter how you learn something, if you do
not use it occasionally you are likely to forget it unless you review it.
Three studies illustrate the variety of learning tasks in which review has
been found to help. One psychologist studied her memory for events
that she had recorded in a diary during a period of four and one-half

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

89

years. She recalled only 36 percent of events that she never reviewed,
but her recall went up to 88 percent for events that she had reviewed at
least 4 times during four years. In another study students remembered
more from a lecture when a short pause for review was provided at the
end. In a third study Pakistani college students remembered nonsense
syllables better after 6 hours when they reviewed than did other students
not given a chance to review.36
To use review as a part of SQ3R, survey again, reviewing what you
could recite and noting what you could not. Question yourself again. Like
the Survey, the Review should take only a few minutes. In chapter 2 we
saw that it takes fewer trials to relearn old material (even when it has
apparently been forgotten when measured by recall) than to learn new
material; thus, it pays to review the material occasionally to refresh your
memory so that you will not have to spend as much time going over the
material for the exam.
It was noted earlier that spaced reviews are better than continuous
(massed) reviews. The best times to review are: during study, by reciting
after each major section; immediately after studying; and just before the
exam. A review immediately after studying helps you consolidate the
material in your memory, and a later review helps you relearn forgotten
material. One study found that having one review immediately after
learning and one a week later was more effective than only one review,
or two reviews immediately after learning, or two reviews a week later.
For eight-year-old children, an immediate review-test was more effective
than a review-test a week later.37
Many students have reported a saving in study effort by the following
rule: Neverfinisha reading session without reviewing in outline the main
points of what has just been read. This rule has been found by many
students to be the most important single step to reduce forgetting. Not
only does it help you see what you have learned, but it also helps you
learn the material further before forgetting it (in chapter 3 it was noted
that most forgetting occurs soon after learning). In addition, such review
saves time and effort; because you remember more, you do not have to
spend so much time rereading and reviewing the material for the exam
later.38
One study found that the best review schedule for remembering
people's names was a series of gradually increasing intervals between
reviews.39 For example, you might review the name of a person immediately after meeting her, then again 15 seconds later, then maybe a
minute later, and then several minutes later. I used an increasing-interval
review schedule during a 16-month period when I was memorizing
scriptures. I learned one new scripture each day, and carried with me

90

YOUR MEMORY

seven scriptures on cards—the new one I was learning that day plus the
six I had learned the previous six days. After seven days a card would go
in afileto be reviewed once a week for a month, then once a month for
several months, and then once every three months. This schedule of
gradually increasing review intervals helped me memorize about 500
scriptures (averaging about two verses each) in 16 months.
Note that reviewing just before an exam is different from cramming
for the exam. The key word in the difference is "new." If the material
you are studying is new to you (that is, you are learning it for the first
time) then you are cramming. If it is not new (that is, you are going over
what you have studied before) then you are reviewing. Although a final
review just before the exam is recommended, cramming is not.
This section on reviewing applies to lecture or reading notes as well
as to textbooks. Researchers have studied two possible benefits that can
come from taking notes. The "encoding" function of notes is the benefit
that comes from putting the material in your own words in order to write
it down. The "external-storage" function is the benefit that comes from
having something in writing to review later. Although research has
provided some support for the encoding function, the external storage
function is more consistently supported by research evidence. Notes
give you something to review later, and reviewing notes usually produces
higher achievement than not reviewing notes.40
When my students come to my office to talk about an exam they
have taken, I ask them to bring their class notes with them; I often find
that their notes have the answers to several of the questions they missed.
They took good notes but did not study them well enough. Similarly,
research found that the lecture notes of most college students contained
the answers to many of the test questions they had missed. A common
mistake was to wait until just before the exam to review their notes,
which by then usually had lost much of their meaning. You can demonstrate the importance of reviewing your lecture notes soon after the
lecture by comparing your ability to read and interpret your own notes
taken during a recent lecture with those you took several weeks ago and
have not looked at since.41
HOW WELL DO THE PRINCIPLES AND STRATEGIES WORK?
The distinction between "principles" in chapters 4 and 5 and "strategies"
in this chapter is somewhat arbitrary; some principles could be viewed
as strategies (for example, "associate it" or "overlearn it"), and some
strategies could be viewed as principles (for example, "review"). The
strategies themselves also are highly overlapping and interrelated. For
example, spaced study allows for review and use of part learning, and

Strategies for Effective Learning: Study Skills

•

91

the study systems include some strategies, such as recitation, discussed
in other sections. You have probably used some of the principles and
strategies, but you may have used them without knowing for sure what
you were doing or why you were doing it. You may have used others
without knowing whether they were really doing any good, and you may
even have used others in such a way that they did not do much good.
Do the principles and strategies discussed in chapters 4, 5, and 6
really help? One classic study indicates that they do. People were taught
seven rules for memorizing. One group was instructed in the seven rules,
and then given 3 hours of practice using the rules. A second group also
practiced memorizing for 3 hours, but they were given no instruction.
Both groups were then given a memorization test involving many different kinds of material, such as poetry, prose, facts, foreign languages,
and historical dates. The instructed group improved about 8 times as
much in their memorizing ability as did the uninstructed group—an
average of 36 percent compared with about 4.5 percent for the uninstructed group.42
The seven rules that the students were taught are listed below as
they were given in the original study. After each rule, in parentheses,
are the principles and strategies that are related to the rule.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Learn by wholes. (Whole Learning, "Survey" of SQ3R)
Use active self-testing. (Recitation)
Use rhythm and grouping. (Meaningfulness, Organization)
Attention to meaning and advantages of picturing. (Meaningfulness,
Visualization)
5. Mental alertness and concentration. (Attention)
6. Use of secondary associations. (Association)
7. Confidence in ability to memorize. (Relaxation, Overlearning)
A lot of research done on various learning strategies, including
those in this chapter, has produced a lot of evidence that people can
become more effective learners when they are taught these strategies.
A recent review of research on study skills courses in which students
learned how to use most of the basic principles and learning strategies
concluded that such courses have been found to increase reading comprehension, reduce anxiety, improve course grades, and improve academic performance. Training in learning strategies seems to be effective
from elementary school through college.43
One of the conclusions listed in What Works regards study skills:
The ways in which children study influence strongly how much they
learn. Examples of sound study practices are listed, most of which are
covered in this chapter, and it is stated that low-ability and inexperienced

92

YOUR MEMORY

students can learn more information and study more efficiently when
they use these skills.44
SQ3R and similar study systems have been found to increase the
rate of reading, level of comprehension, and performance on examinations. A modified version of SQ3R (PQRST) has even helped braindamaged patients accomplish memory tasks that they could not accomplish without the system. An analysis of SQ3R in the framework of a
learning theory called "information processing" explains why each step
of SQ3R can facilitate the processing of information, and the author
suggested that students should be shown why SQ3R works so that they
will use it.45
However, evaluation of the study systems has not been all positive.
Reviews of research on the study systems have suggested that although
SQ3R appears to have a good deal of intuitive appeal, there is not a great
deal of empirical support for it, and that much of the perceived potency
of the study systems is based on opinion more than fact. One of the main
problems with SQ3R and other systems is simply that most students do
not use them, probably because they are too much work (as I suggested
earlier for recitation). Also, the systems may be too complex to be used
effectively by children and other less-mature students.46

Working Miracles with \bur
Memory: An Introduction
to Mnemonics

C

an you remember a list of 20 or more words, in any order, after
hearing it just once? Can you repeat a 30-digit number after hearing
it once? Can you look through a shuffled deck of cards once and
remember all 52 cards in order, or tell where any particular cards are in
the deck? Can you memorize a 50-page magazine so that you can tell
what is on any page?
These are examples of the kinds of memory feats performed by
stage mnemonists in their acts. These feats are among those I have
duplicated for public demonstrations, using the techniques and systems
in this book. Other memory feats I have also done include memorizing
the calendar for the second half of this century, so that I can give the day
of the week for any date from 1950 to 1999; memorizing more than 100
telephone numbers of all the members of an organization to which I
belong; memorizing the page numbers of nearly 200 hymns in a hymnal;
memorizing the major contents of each of the 239 numbered sections of
a book.
Feats such as these seem like miracles to people who are unfamiliar
with the mnemonic systems involved, and they really are miracles when
compared with the unaided memory. However, most people can do such
feats if they want to badly enough to learn and practice the appropriate
93

94

YOUR MEMORY

mnemonic systems. For example, my daughter did the 30-digit number
and magazine demonstrations when she was thirteen years old and my
son did the 20-word demonstration when he was eight. You may not want
to perform these particular feats, but the important point is that you can
do them; they are not beyond the reach of a normal memory. If you can
do these feats, you can also do other things with your memory that you
do want to do, but may have , thought were beyond your ability. The
purpose of this chapter, and the rest of the book, is to teach you how to
use mnemonics to help you work your own memory miracles.
WHAT ARE MNEMONICS?
The word mnemonic (pronounced "ne MON ik") was briefly defined in
the introduction to this book as "aiding the memory." It is derived from
Mnemosyne, the name of the ancient Greek goddess of memory. The
use of mnemonics is not new; the Loci system described in chapter 10
dates back to about 500 B.C., and was used by Greek orators to
remember long speeches. An interesting book has traced the history of
mnemonics from ancient times through the Renaissance, and several
articles have reviewed the history of mnemonics since then.1
"Mnemonics" refers in general to methods for improving memory;
a mnemonic technique is any technique that aids the memory. Most
researchers, however, define mnemonics more narrowly as being what
most people consider to be rather unusual, artificial memory aids. For
example, the learning strategies discussed in chapter 6 aid the memory,
but they are not usually referred to as mnemonic strategies. One
characteristic of most mnemonic techniques is that they do not have an
inherent connection with the material to be learned; rather, they impose
meaning or structure on material that is otherwise not very meaningful
or organized. Another characteristic is that they usually involve adding
something to the material being learned to make it more memorable,
and thus are referred to by many researchers as visual or verbal
"elaboration." The elaborations create meaningful associations between
what is to be learned and what is already known.2
Mnemonics can be either visual or verbal. Visual mnemonics use
visual imagery to associate the items to be remembered; verbal mnemonics make the associations with words. For example, to associate the
words cats and rats, you could either form a visual image of cats eating
rats (visual mediator), or you could form a sentence such as "Cats like
to eat rats" (verbal mediator). The first part of this chapter gives some
examples of verbal mnemonics.3 Most of the rest of the book, and most
research on mnemonics, focuses more on visual mnemonics.
Most of the examples of mnemonics given in this chapter are single-

Working Miracles with Your Memory

95

purpose mnemonics used for remembering specific facts. Mnemonics
discussed in later chapters include more general-purpose systems that
can be used over and over to remember different sets of material. I will
refer to the kinds of specific-purpose mnemonics discussed in this
chapter as mnemonic "techniques," and will refer to the more general
mnemonics discussed in chapters 9 through 12 as mnemonic "systems."
Some Sample Mnemonics
Some of the examples of association discussed in chapter 4 could be
called mnemonic techniques (such as remembering port versus starboard
and stalactite versus stalagmite, and spelling). Additional examples can
also illustrate mnemonic associations. You can remember that a Bactrian
camel has two humps and a Dromedary camel has one hump by noticing
the two humps in the letter B and the one hump in D. You can remember
that there are 52 white keys and 36 black keys on a piano by associating
the white keys with a deck of cards (52 cards) or a calendar (52 weeks
in a year), and the black keys with a yardstick (36 inches). Mnemonic
associations are frequently used in spelling (for example, bad grammar
will mar a report; stationERy is for a lettER; she screamed "EEE" as
she passed by a cEmEtEry). A book has been published containing such
mnemonic associations for 800 problem spelling words, and such spelling
mnemonics have been found to be helpful for sixth graders.4
Rhymes such as those discussed in chapter 4 may also properly be
referred to as mnemonic techniques. The following are some additional
examples. A rhyme for remembering the books of the Old Testament in
order begins: "That great Jehovah speaks to us, in Genesis and Exodus;
Leviticus and Numbers see, followed by Deuteronomy," and continues
for the remaining 34 books. A rhyme I once read on a cereal box (when
I was hard-pressed for reading material at breakfast one morning) is
aimed at helping children remember what each vitamin does for us. Part
of the rhyme went as follows:
The vitamin called A has important connections
It aids in our vision and helps stop infections.
To vitamin C this ditty now comes,
Important for healing and strong healthy gums.
Done with both of these?
Here come the B's:
Bj for the nerves.
B2 helps cells energize.
Digesting the protein's
Be's prize.

96

YOUR MEMORY

A rhyme helps us remember how to treat a shock victim: "If his
face is red, raise his head; if his face is pale, raise his tail." Rhymes have
also helped people in their cooking chores: "A pint's a pound, the world
around" helps us remember a useful equivalence; "Cooking rice? Water's
twice" helps us remember to cook one cup of raw rice in two cups of
water; and "One big T equals teaspoons three" helps us remember that
there are three teaspoons in a tablespoon.
A well-known mnemonic is used to remember which way to set the
clock for daylight savings time: "Spring forward, fall back" (set the clock
forward an hour in the spring, and back an hour in the fall). To remember
long numbers, sentences can be constructed so that the number of
letters in each word corresponds with each digit of the number in order
(if the first digit is 3, the first word would have three letters, etc.). For
example, to remember pi (k) to four decimal places (3.1416) remember
"Yes, I know a number." For the ambitious memorizer, this technique
can be combined with the use of rhyme to remember % to 30 decimal
places, as the following example from the Mensa Journal shows:
Sir, I send a rhyme excelling
In sacred truth and rigid spelling,
Numerical sprites elucidate
All my own striving can't relate,
It nature gain
Not you complain
Though doctor Johnson fulminate.
We saw earlier that a rhyme ("Thirty days has September...") can
help us remember how many days are in each month, but some people
have a hard time remembering the rhyme. (Someone once said that a
more appropriate rhyme might be "Thirty days has September, all the
rest I can't remember.") If you have a hard time remembering the
rhyme, you can use another mnemonic technique to remember the
number of days in the months (see the following diagram). Hold your
hands out in front of you in fists, with the palms down and the hands
together. The knuckle of the left little finger represents January, the
valley between it and the ringfingerrepresents February, the knuckle of
the ring finger represents March, and so on until you reach the knuckle
of the right ring finger, which represents December. All the knuckle
months have 31 days, and the valley months are the short months. You
can do the same with only one fist by starting over on the knuckle of the
little finger for August after you reach July on the knuckle of the index
finger.

Working Miracles with Your Memory

97

Memorizing the Calendar
While we are on the topic of calendars, let us consider again the 12-digit
number that we have encountered several times: 376-315-374-264. In
chapter 5,1 told you that if you memorize this 12-digit number you will,
in effect, have the calendar for the whole year of 1988 memorized. Here
is how it works. Each digit represents the date of the first Sunday in
each month; the first Sunday in January is the 3rd, the first Sunday in
June is the 5th, and thefirstSunday in December is the 4th.
Knowing that, all you have to know in addition are the months and
the days of the week, If you can also add and subtract up to 7, then you
can give the day of the week for any date. What day of the week is July
4, 1988? July is the seventh month. The seventh digit is 3, so the first
Sunday in July is the 3rd. Add one day to determine that July 4, 1988 is a
Monday. Try another one. What day is June 18, 1988? The sixth digit is
5, so thefirstSunday in June is the 5th. Add 7 to get the second Sunday,
the 12th, and add six more days to get the 18th, which is a Saturday. (In
this example it may be simpler to add 7 more to the second Sunday to
get the third Sunday, the 19th, and then subtract one day.)
Try a question like the following: How many Mondays are in May
1988? The digit for May is 1, so the first Monday is May 2. Add sevens
to get the other Mondays—May 9, 16, 23, 30; there arefiveMondays in
May. Try the following: What date is the fourth Thursday in November
(Thanksgiving)? The digit for November is 6. This means that the first
Thursday (counting backward) is November 3, making the second Thursday November 10, the third Thursday November 17, and the fourth
Thursday November 24.

98

YOUR MEMORY

Can you see how the principle of chunking is involved , in this
mnemonic? For all practical purposes you have 365 things memorized,
when in fact you really have only 12 things memorized, but each of the
12 chunks represents about 30 bits of information (dates). Of course,
you can use the technique for any year merely by memorizing the
appropriate number for that year; memorizing a new 12-digit number
once a year should not be too difficult a memory task (especially after
reading this book).
One of my students memorized the calendar using this number and
then amazed his colleagues at work the next day. He reported that one
of them got a puzzled look on his face and then said, "Oh, I know you
stayed up for 5 hours last night and memorized the whole thing." The
student had actually spent less than 3 minutes memorizing and practicing
the number, and reported that "it was truly a miracle of effectiveness."
When he was age eleven my son did an impressive demonstration using
the calendar number; several members of the audience called out their
birthdays (month and date) and in less than 10 seconds he told them
what day of the week their birthday was that year.
FIRST LETTERS AND KEYWORDS
The varied examples of mnemonics in the previous section help give a
feeling for what mnemonics are. Many of the specific examples were
discussed under the general categories of "associations" and "rhymes."
This section discusses additional examples of verbal mnemonics that
psychologists have studied under the headings of "first-letter" mnemonics and "keyword" mnemonics.
First-letter Mnemonics
Can you name the Great Lakes in the midwestern United States? Try it
now before you read any further. What you have just attempted was a
recall task. Let us now change it to an aided-recall task. The following
word is composed of the first letter of the name of each lake: HOMES.
Using the word as a cue, if you were not able to name allfivelakes, can
you do so now? Many people who cannot recall the names of the lakes
can do so when given this cue. The cue is what is known as an acronym—
a word that is made out of the first letters of the items to be remembered. In this example the acronym HOMES stands for Huron, Ontario,
Michigan, Erie, arid Superior. A mnemonic technique that is similar to
the acronym is the acrostic—a series of words, lines, or verses in which
the first letters form a word or phrase; for example, an acrostic for

Working Miracles with Your Memory

99

remembering the names of the Great Lakes might be, Healthy Old Men
Exercise Some. Acronyms and acrostics are referred to by most mnemonics researchers as "first-letter mnemonics" (for reasons that should
be obvious).
A well-known acronym that is used as an aid to remember the colors
of the visible spectrum is the name ROY G. BIV. This name represents
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet. Similarly, suppose
you have a shopping list of bananas, oranges, milk, and bread. The word
BOMB could be used to help remember the list. An acronym does not
even have to be a real word. What are the only four states in the United
States that come together at a single point? The coined word CANU will
help you remember Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. An
acronym for remembering the excretory organs of the body is SKILL
(Skin, Kidneys, Intestines, Liver, Lungs). An acronym that may help a
French student remember most of the verbs that are conjugated with
the helping verb "to be" is the name of a lady, MRS. VANDERTAMP
(Monter, Rester, Sortir, Venir, AUer, Naitre, Descendre, Entrer, Rentrer,
Tomber, Arriver, Mourir, Partir).
Acronyms are widely used to represent associations (CORE for
Congress of Racial Equality), organizations (NOW for National Organization for Women), government agencies (CAB for Civil Aeronautics
Board), military titles and terms (WAVES for Women Accepted for
Voluntary Emergency Service, SNAFU for "Situation normal, all fouled
up"). Collections have been compiled of at least 10,000 such acronyms
used on a national level.5 One reason that so many groups identify
themselves with an acronym is that it serves as an aid to help people
remember them.
Many examples of acrostics can also be given. The colors of the
visible spectrum have been remembered by the acrostic, "Richard Of
York Gave Battle In Vain." Psalm 119 is divided into 22 eight-verse
sections corresponding to the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet; the
first word of every verse in each section begins with the same one of the
22 letters, in order. Many anatomy students have used acrostics like
"On Old Olympus' Towering Top, A Finn And German Viewed Some
Hops" to remember the cranial nerves (Olfactory, Optic, Oculomotor,
Trochlear, Trigeminal, Abducens, Facial, Auditory, Glossopharyngeal, Vagus, Spinal Accessory, and Hypoglossal),6 and many music students have
used "Every Good Boy Does Fine" to remember the notes on the
lines in the treble clef (EGBDF).
An acrostic for remembering the order of planets from the sun is
"Men Very Easily Make Jugs Serve Useful Nocturnal Purposes" (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars" Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto). An

100

YOUR MEMORY

acrostic that helped one woman line up her baking ingredients in their
proper order is "Shirley Shouldn't Eat Fresh Mushrooms" (Sugar,
Shortening, Eggs, Flour, Milk), and an acrostic that has helped mathematics students perform operations in their proper order of priority is
"Bless My Dear Aunt Sally" (Brackets, Multiplication, Division, Addition,
Subtraction).
Several research studies done onfirst-lettermnemonics have found
that they are among the mostfrequentmnemonic techniques that people
use on their own and that they can significantly improve memory for lists
of items, even in people with brain damage.7
There are at least four ways in which acronyms and acrostics can
help memory,
1. Acronyms and acrostics make the material meaningful; they give
you something meaningful to remember, such as HOMES, ROY G. BIV,
and Every Good Boy Does Fine.
2. Acronyms chunk the information so you do not have to remember a lot. Instead of five lakes or seven colors, for example, you only
have to remember one word or one name. Of course, an acronym or
acrostic itself is not the original information; it merely gives you some
cues to help you retrieve the original information. After you remember
the acronym or acrostic, you still must be able to generate the original
information from it. (A physics professor may not be particularly impressed if a student wrote on an exam that the colors of the visible
spectrum were ROY G. BIV.) Thus, acronyms and acrostics may be
more useful for terms that are familiar to you than for terms that are not
familiar, because afirstletter might not be a sufficient cue for terms you
do not know very well.8
3. First-letter mnemonics provide cues to help you retrieve the
items; therefore, they change a recall task to an aided recall task. This
makes your memory task easier by narrowing your memory search.
Research has shownrthat the first letters of words help people recall the
words (even patients with dementia and brain damage). Also, when
people are trying to recall something they know, such as the name of a
relative or the capital of a country, theyfrequentlytry to cue themselves
by generating letters of the alphabet to trigger retrieval.9
4. First-letter mnemonics can tell you how many items are to be
remembered, so that you know when you have recalled all of them. For
example, if you have recalled the names of four Great Lakes, you know
you have one more to go because there are five letters in the acronym
HOMES orfivewords in the acrostic, Healthy Old Men Exercise Some.

Working Miracles with Your Memory

101

These four advantages of first-letter mnemonics apply as long as
you can remember which acronym or acrostic goes with which information, but what if you forget the mnemonic itself? It will not do you much
good, for example, to remember that there is some acronym to help
remember the names of the Great Lakes if you cannot remember what
the acronym is. Here is a suggestion that may help prevent this problem:
Associate the acronym with the information it represents. You might use
a verbal association such as, "The Great Lakes make good HOMES for
big fish," or a visual association such as an image of HOMES (houses)
floating on the Great Lakes. Now when you try to think of the acronym
for the Great Lakes, you think of what it was that wasfloatingon the
lakes and that leads you to HOMES.
The Keyword Mnemonic
A great amount of research has been done on a mnemonic that is usually
called the "Keyword mnemonic." This term was used by Richard Atkinson in a 1975 article describing the use of this mnemonic in learning
foreign language vocabulary.10 Subsequent researchers usually attribute
the Keyword mnemonic to him, probably because he was the first
respected psychologist who brought it to their attention and initiated
systematic research on it. However, the technique was developed and
used by other people before 1975, particularly for foreign languages.
The Keyword mnemonic consists of two steps, one verbal and one
visual. The first step is to construct a concrete keyword to represent
the foreign word to be learned. For example, the Spanish word for duck
is pato, which could be represented by the sound-alike keyword pot. The
second step is to form a visual image connecting the keyword with the
English meaning. For example, you could picture a duck cooking in a pot
or wearing a pot on its head. To recall the meaning of the Spanish word
pato you first retrieve the keyword pot, and then the stored image that
links it to duck.
The Keyword mnemonic is really just the combined use of two
mnemonic techniques discussed later in this chapter—substitute words
and visual associations. It also shares several properties and principles in
common with other mnemonics discussed in later chapters (such as the
Loci system and face-name mnemonics). Research shows that the Keyword mnemonic is very effective in learning a foreign vocabulary, and it
has also been used effectively to aid students in several other kinds of
paired-associate learning tasks in school (see chapter 14).11
In my travels to other countries to speak on my memory research,

102

YOUR MEMORY

I have had occasion to learn some vocabulary and pronunciation in six
languages—Spanish, French, Italian, German, Hebrew, and Japanese. I
did not learn any of these languages well enough to give my research
report in that language or even to carry on an intelligent conversation,
but I learned just enough to be polite and to communicate some
necessary ideas. This included three or four dozen basic words and
phrases in each language, such as "please" and "thank you," "yes" and
"no," "hello" and "goodbye," "Where is . . .?" "I don't understand..."
"Do you speak English?" and "That costs too much." I used the Keyword
mnemonic to help in learning many of the words, and found that it could
even be used for some phrases. For example, the pronunciation of
"You're welcome" in Hebrew is like "al lo da \5VHR" (a load of air), and in
Japanese the pronunication is like "do eTASHeMASHta" (don't touch the
mustache).

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF MNEMONICS
A recent memory textbook suggested that the objections some people
have (see pseudo-limitations in chapter 8) to the use of some memory
methods might decrease if the reasons for the mnemonics' effectiveness
were better understood. It helps to better understand mnemonics and to
remove some of the mystical aura that can surround mnemonics if we
realize that they are based upon well-established principles of learning
and memory. More than 20 years ago, one psychologist observed that
mnemonic techniques are oddities only in the sense that they enable
their users to deal with memory tasks that most people do not even
attempt in everyday life, "but they are not oddities in the sense that they
employ any basic procedures which are absent from everyday activities.
They are merely specialized elaborations of normal memory activities."
During the 1970s other memory researchers made similar observations:12
The secrets of those who practice the art of memory ought to shed light on the
organization and operation of the mechanisms involved in memory.
A study of mnemonics and mnemonists can provide cues as to the functioning of
normal memory and a way of testing the generality of theories of memory.
No general theory of memory can be adequate without being able to account in
principle for the efficiency of mnemonic systems.
The point is the same one that was made earlier, that mnemonic
techniques and systems do not replace the basic principles of learning but

Working Miracles with Your Memory

103

use them. Mnemonics make use of all the basic principles of learning and
memory that were discussed in chapter 4, as well as others.13
Meaningfulness. Mnemonic techniques and systems help make material meaningful by using rhymes, patterns, and associations. In fact,
probably the main function of most mnemonics is to impose meaning on
material that is not inherently meaningful; that is the kind of material for
which mnemonics have best shown their value. Mnemonics are not
needed for material that already has meaning. One of the most powerful
examples of the use of this principle is the Phonetic system (chapter 12),
which gives meaning to one of the most abstract, meaningless kinds of
material—numbers—so that they will be easier to learn.
Organization. Most of the mnemonic techniques just described, and
all of the mnemonic systems described in subsequent chapters, impose
a meaningful organization on the material. As mental filing systems, they
give a systematic way to record and retrieve the material. Again,
mnemonics are not needed for material that already has an inherent logic
and structure.
Association. We have seen some examples of mnemonic associations. The principle of association is basic to all the mnemonic systems
discussed in subsequent chapters. In the Link system the items are
associated with each other. In the Loci, Peg, and Phonetic systems,
easily remembered material that is memorized previously serves as your
filing system; you associate the new material that you want to learn with
the material that has been memorized previously.
Visualization. Visual imagery also plays a central role in the mnemonic systems because the associations are usually made visually.
Visualization is probably the most unusual aspect of mnemonic systems,
and may also be the most misunderstood. For these reasons, it is
discussed more thoroughly in this book than any other principle. Chapter
3 discussed the differences between remembering pictures and words;
chapter 4 discussed the effectiveness of visual imagery in remembering
verbal material; and this chapter offers some suggestions for the effective
use of visual associations to remember verbal material.
Attention. Mnemonic systems force you to concentrate on the
material in order to form pictures and associate them. Mnemonics can
foster attention because they tend to be more interesting and fun than
rote learning.

104

YOUR MEMORY

Other Principles and Strategies
In addition to making inherent use of all the basic principles of memory
from chapter 4, mnemonic systems can also be used in connection with
other principles and strategies discussed in chapters 5 and 6. For
example, although learning with a mnemonic system frequently takes
fewer repetitions than learning with the unaided memory, your retention
of the material will still be increased if you overlearn it.
Although mnemonic systems do not completely eliminate interference, a considerable amount of evidence shows that they do reduce it as
compared with using only the unaided memory. For example, mnemonic
systems have been used to learn several successive lists, or several
different orders of the same list, with very little interference among
the different lists.14 You will probably still get some interference
among different lists if they are learned consecutively by the same
mnemonic system, but the interference will be a lot less than if you did
not use a system. Of course, you can reduce the interference even
further by combining the use of mnemonics with the other methods for
reducing interference that were discussed in chapter 6.
The effectiveness of mnemonic techniques can be increased if you
combine them with other learning strategies. Space out your study
sessions. Use whole and part learning where appropriate. Use recitation.
Finally, use the relevant steps from the SQ3R study system where
appropriate. For example, just because you use a mnemonic to learn
something does not mean that you do not need to review the material
occasionally. Mnemonic systems aid the memory by supplementing study
strategies, not by replacing them, just as with the basic principles of
learning.15
HOW TO MAKE EFFECTIVE VISUAL ASSOCIATIONS
Because visual association plays a central role in most mnemonic techniques and systems, it is useful to have some guides for making effective
use of visual imagery in associations. Research has been done on three
factors that can help to make your visual associations effective—interaction, vividness, and bizarreness.16
Interaction
Visual imagery by itself is not maximally effective. To make visual
association effective, your imagery must both be "visual" and involve
"association." The two items you are associating should be pictured as

Working Miracles with Your Memory

105

interacting in some way with each other (one of them doing something
to or with the other), rather than as merely sitting next to each other or
one on top of the other. For example, if you were associating the words
dog and broom it would be better to picture a dog sweeping with a broom
than to picture a dog standing by a broom.
Considerable research evidence supports the interaction effect:
Visual imagery involving interaction among the items is more effective
than separate images of the items. Several research studies in which
pictures were shown to people have found that when the items in the
picture were interacting they were remembered better than when they
were not interacting—for kindergarten children through elderly adults.17
In other studies people made up their own mental pictures to
remember words rather than having pictures shown to them. Again,
interacting imagery was more effective than separate images in serial
learning as well as in paired-associate learning. In fact, even when people
were not instructed to remember the words, just telling them to compare
the words in each pair with one another yielded better memory for the
words than making judgments about each word individually. However,
children as young as first graders may not benefit as much from
interacting imagery when they are instructed to make up their own
mental pictures as they do when pictures are shown to them.18
One possible reason for the effectiveness of interacting imagery is
that images of separate items can be combined into a single image that
is remembered as a unit; therefore, each part of the image serves as a
cue for remembering the rest of the unit. This suggests that chunking
plays a role in the effectiveness of interacting imagery: One image
represents the relationship among two or more items. Interactive imagery is not much better than separate images for word pairs that are
already meaningfully related, possibly because they are already remembered as a single unit better than are the arbitrary word pairs used in
most research.19
Vividness
A vivid visual image is one that is clear, distinct, and strong—one that is
as similar as possible to actually seeing a picture. Pictures have an even
stronger effect on memory than, instructions to visualize, so that the
more you can see the image like you were actually looking at a picture,
the better.20 You should try to see your mental pictures as clearly as
possible. For example, if you are associating the words dog and broom
you should not just think about the two words together or think about
the idea of a dog sweeping with a broom, but you should try to actually

106

YOUR MEMORY

see the dog sweeping with the broom in your mind's eye. People who are
not accustomed to visualizing (and many adults are not) may find that it
helps at first if they close their eyes when trying to see the mental
picture. It also seems to help if you make the mental picture detailed.21
What kind of dog is it? What kind of broom? Where is he sweeping? What
is he sweeping? Picture a dachshund sweeping mud off your porch with
a pushbroom; or a bulldog sweeping food off the kitchen floor with a
straw broom.
In addition to detail, three suggestions that are frequently recommended to help make visual associations effective are aimed at making
them more vivid (and maybe even more bizarre—see the next section):
1. Motion. See the picture in action (the dog is sweeping with the
broom, not just holding it).
2. Substitution. See one item in place of the other (you are sweeping
with a dog instead of a broom, or a broom is coming out of a
doghouse).
3. Exaggeration. See one or both of the items exaggerated in size or
number (a Chihuahua is sweeping with a giant broom, or a large St.
Bernard is using a small whisk broom).
Another factor that may help enhance vividness is familiarity; images
that are familiar in terms of prior experiences have been found to be
more vivid.22
Researchers have had a hard time defining and measuring vividness,
which can affect whether or not they conclude that vividness helps
memory. Even so, several different kinds of studies suggest that visual
associations should be vivid to be remembered better. In one study of
imagery in paired-associate learning, people rated the vividness of their
images as they constructed them. For every person, the more vivid the
images were rated, the better they were recalled. In another study,
people who were instructed to make vivid visual images tended to
remember a list of words better than people who were told only to make
visual images; people instructed to make vivid, active visual images
tended to perform even better.23
Effects of mental practice on motor skills were greater for people
who were able to form vivid and/or controlled memory images of the
process. People who tended to form vivid visual images of other people
not only remembered their appearance better than those who did not
but also remembered other information (attitudes, values, history) about
them better. Finally, people whose images were generally high in
vividness could use imagery mnemonics more effectively than those

Working Miracles with Your Memory

107

whose images were low in vividness (although their general, overall
memory performance was not significantly different).24
Bizarreness
Popular memory-training books typically recommend that visual associations should be bizarre (unusual, weird, implausible, incongruous, ludicrous). The opposite of bizarre would be plausible—imagining a picture
that makes sense and could really occur. For example, a picture of a dog
being chased out of a house by a person with a broom is plausible; a dog
sweeping with a broom would be somewhat bizarre; and a dog riding a
broom like a witch, or a person sweeping thefloorwith a dog tied to the
end of a broomstick, would be bizarre.
At least 30 research studies have been done on the effectiveness of
bizarre versus plausible imagery.25 Most of the studies have found no
difference between bizarre and plausible images in their effectiveness,
but a few studies have found that bizarre images were more effective
than plausible images under some conditions, and a few have found that
bizarre images were less effective. Some of the differences in findings
are probably due to methodological differences among studies (such as
different definitions of bizarreness, immediate versus delayed recall,
pictures versus mental images, and paired-associates versusfreerecall).
When bizarreness does help, it may be because bizarre images also
incorporate other factors that help memory, such as interaction, vividness, uniqueness, and time. Some studies have found that bizarreness
can be confounded with interaction; some interacting images may almost
have to be bizarre in order to involve interaction (for example, it is hard
to think of a plausible picture showing an elephant and a piano interacting). Bizarre images may be more striking and attention-getting, and
thus more vivid than plausible images: We saw in the previous section
that vivid images tend to be remembered better than nonvivid images.
Bizarre images tend more to be unique (distinctive or novel) than
plausible images, and the uniqueness of an image helps memory. Novel
visual associations between objects have been found to help memory for
the objects more than common associations, as long as the novel
associations were plausible; implausible novel associations were no more
effective than common plausible associations.26 (An example of a common
plausible association is a man playing a harp; a plausible novel association
is a man sitting on a harp; an implausible novel association is a harp
playing a man.) Bizarre images generally take more time to form than do
plausible images, and extra time and effort spent thinking of an image
may help you remember it better.

108

YOUR MEMORY

However, it is not necessary that an image be bizarre in order to
benefit from these factors (interaction, vividness, uniqueness, extra
time). You can use all of thesefactorsin images that are not bizarre. One
popular memory-training book illustrated the advantages of ridiculous,
impossible, or illogical associations by the following examples for associating airplane and tree: A logical picture would be an airplane parked
near a tree. Since that is possible, the book said, it probably will not
work; better pictures would be airplanes growing on trees, or trees
boarding an airplane.27 It is true that the latter examples would be more
memorable than a plane parked near a tree. However, it is also true that
more plausible pictures involving interaction, vividness, and uniqueness
would also be more memorable; for example, a low-flying airplane
shearing the tops off the trees, or an airplane crashing into a tree.
One reason why bizarreness may be ineffective for some people is
that some people have a hard time making up bizarre images. Similarly,
elderly adults tend to not want to use bizarre imagery, and natural
interacting imagery works just as well'for them.28 If youfindit difficult to
make up bizarre images or you feel uncomfortable doing so, then I
recommend that you concentrate on making the images interacting and
vivid—do not worry about making them bizarre. On the other hand, if
you do not have any trouble imagining bizarre associations and you feel
comfortable with them, then I recommend that you go ahead and use
them.
MORE ON EFFECTIVE MNEMONICS
In addition to making effective visual associations, there are some other
considerations that can help you use mnemonics effectively. How can
you use visual associations on abstract verbal material? Is it more
effective to use your own images and associations or to use ones provided
by someone more experienced? How do the guidelines apply to using
effective verbal associations? The answers to these questions suggest
further guidelines for using mnemonics effectively.
How Can You Use Images for Abstract Material?
In chapter 3 we saw that concrete words are easier to visualize than
abstract words. It is not hard to picture concrete words like apple, car,
book, and horse, but it is harder to picture more abstract words like
nourishment, liberty, justice, and happiness. Since most mnemonic systems use visual imagery, how can the systems be used to remember
abstract material?

Working Miracles with Your Memory

109

The procedure for using imagery to help remember abstract terms
is the same as for concrete terms except that you add a step using
"substitute words." You substitute a concrete word to represent the
abstract word. One way of doing this is to use objects that typify the
abstract term: for liberty, you might picture the Liberty Bell; for justice,
a judge; for happiness, a smiling face; for education, a schoolhouse; for
fashion, a model; for depth, a hole; for agree, a nodding head; for salary,
a paycheck. A second way of substituting a concrete word for an abstract
one is to use objects whose names sound like the abstract term: celery
for salary; fried ham for freedom; happy nest for happiness. You can even
use this technique to remember nonsense syllables: Cage for KAJ; rocks
for ROX; seal for ZYL; sack for XAC.
The techniques of substitute words isfrequentlyrecommended in
memory-training books, and we will see in chapter 13 that it plays an
important role in remembering names and faces. We saw that the
substitute-word technique is part of the Keyword mnemonic described
earlier in this chapter. Research on the Keyword mnemonic has found
that people are quite adept at using the above two approaches to
"concretize" abstract materials for effective visual images. However, one
study found that for college students who had no experience with
substitute words, the first approach (based on meaning) was more
effective than the second approach (based on sound-alikes) but was also
more difficult to use.29
Do substitute words really help in learning abstract material? Pictures of concrete substitute objects have been found to help in learning
abstract paired associates. For example, a picture of a hammer hitting a
vacuum cleaner helped people to remember the pair, "impact-vacuum,"
and a picture of a big flower in an open doorway helped people to
remember "blooming-portal." By using concrete substitute words, people can use visual imagery to learn abstract words almost as well as
concrete words, and to remember verbal material that is more complex
than words (for example, sayings like "history repeats itself"). People
can even use visual imagery to help in concept learning.30
Should You Make up Your Own Mnemonics?
Someone once said that ideas are like children: Your own are very
wonderful. Some, research evidence supports this saying. People tend to
remember information that they generate themselves better than information that is given to them. In addition to memory for words and
sentences, this "generation effect" has also been found for such varied

110

YOUR MEMORY

items as physical movements, product names in advertisements, and
computer commands.31
Does the generation effect apply to mnemonics? Is it more effective
to make up your own mnemonics (substitute words, images, and associations) or to get them from someone else (expert, teacher, researcher,
etc.)? Popular memory treatises since ancient times have suggested that
it is better to form your own mnemonics. Several studies have found that
associations do tend to be more effective and easier to use if the people
think them up themselves than if the associations are provided by the
researcher; however, more of this research has been done with verbal
associations than with visual associations and a few studies have yielded
mixed results.32
There are several possible reasons why you are likely to remember
your own mnemonics better. You may put more thought and effort into
them than into mnemonics that someone else gives you. Your own
mnemonics are likely to be the first associations to come to you at recall
time. Another possible reason is that because other people suggest
mnemonics different from the ones you would think of yourself, they are
not as meaningful to you. Sometimes in my memory class after we have
done an activity that involves using verbal or visual mnemonics, I will ask
some of the students to explain some of their mnemonics to the rest of
the class. Many mnemonics that are very meaningful to a particular
person, and came easily and naturally to him in a split second, may take
several minutes to explain to other people and may sound very cumbersome. You do not have to explain mnemonics that you devise to yourself.
When teaching young children (or anyone else who does not know
how to make effective visual associations) how to use visual associations,
it would probably be best to help them with the associations atfirstuntil
they have some practice and experience. Research has found that people
such as young children or the mentally retarded, who may not be able to
construct good associations on their own, benefit by having associations
suggested to them. The problem with very young (preschool) children is
not so much that they cannot generate visual images; rather, the problem
is that most of them cannot generate effective visual images.33
But even people who cannot form effective associations on their own
can still make effective use of mnemonic pictures provided for them. For
example, in a study on learning foreign language vocabulary, when
preschoolers were provided with mnemonic pictures, their learning
increased as much as 1,000 percent! Most children from eleven years
old appear to be able to use self-generated imagery as effectively as
adults can, but teacher-supplied pictures still worked better than selfgenerated images even for gifted students in the fourth, fifth, and sixth

Working Miracles with Your Memory

111

grades. In addition, people with severe brain damage were not able to
benefitfromusing their own images, but they still benefitedfrompictures
drawn for them. (People with only slight brain damage benefited from
both.)34
How Can You Make Effective Verbal Associations?
Much of this chapter has focused on visual mnemonics. However, we
have also seen that not all mnemonic techniques involve visual imagery.
Examples of nonvisual (verbal) mnemonics were given earlier (verbal
associations, rhymes, acronyms, acrostics), and there are nonvisual
equivalents of most visual associations (see the previous example of
associating the words cats and rats in the section, "What Are Mnemonics?").3*
Verbal mnemonics may come more naturally to some people than
visual mnemonics. The mnemonics used by college students to remember classroom notes tend to be nonvisual, and surveys of techniques
they use in learning word lists did not find visual imagery among, the
many different techniques used. A survey of college students and
housewives in England found that rhymes and acrostics were among the
mostfrequentlyused memory aids. It has been suggested that elderly
adults might benefit morefromverbal mnemonics than visual mnemonics,
because many of the elderly who have difficulty with memory problems
seem to have more difficulty with visual skills than with verbal skills.36
Although some studies have not found a significant difference between visual and verbal associations in their effectiveness, visual associations are more often found to be more effective than verbal ones for
remembering concrete material, whereas verbal associations may be
more effective for abstract material.37 Are there ways to maximize the
effectiveness of verbal associations?
Much of the previous discussion of factors determining the effectiveness of visual associations is also relevant to verbal associations. There
is some evidence that vividness can affect memory for verbal material as
well as for images. The positive relationship between recall and rated
vividness of images has also been found for sentences. In other studies,
people learned concrete sentences or paragraphs that described events
with either high or low vividness. (The vivid descriptions were emotional,
colorful, and forceful, and yielded more graphic imagery.) The vivid
sentences and paragraphs were .recalled better than the nonvivid ones.
Similarly, including vivid adjectives in paragraphs can result in better
recall of the paragraphs than using "dull" adjectives. We saw that
familiarity can add to the vividness of an image; similarly, sentences that

112

YOUR MEMORY

were personalized by including familiar names or places were rated as
higher in imagery value and were remembered better.38
Some of the research on bizarreness in associations has been done
on bizarre sentences as well as pictures, so the conclusions regarding
bizarreness can reasonably be taken as applying to verbal associations as
well as visual associations. The discussion on constructing your own
mnemonics versus having them supplied by others can also be applied to
verbal mnemonics.
The use of substitute words to make abstract verbal material more
concrete is not as directly relevant to verbal associations as it is to visual
associations, but the basic idea of trying to make verbal material more
concrete is relevant. One possible way to make abstract verbal material
more concrete is suggested by a study on memory for abstract sentences
such as, "The regulations annoyed the salesman," or "The set fell off
the table." Such sentences were remembered better when concrete
modifiers were added to yield sentences such as, "The strict parking
regulations annoyed the salesman," and "The ivory chess set fell off the
table."39

The Legitimacy of
Mnemonics: Limitations and
Pseudo-Limitations

A

lthough the practical use of mnemonics dates back more than 20
centuries, the research interest dates back only about 20 years.
During the first half of this century mnemonics were widely taught in
popular memory books and commercial courses, used by mnemonists
and some laymen, and ignored by most psychologists. Until the 1960s,
American psychologists concentrated on outwardly observable behavior
in order to be "scientific," and did not consider mental processes to be a
very legitimate area for research. In addition, many psychologists associated mnemonics with sensationalism, showmanship, and commercialism. (In 1960 some researchers observed that the attitude of many
experimental psychologists was that "mnemonic devices are immoral
tricks suitable only f o r . . . stage magicians.")1 Thus, until about 20 years
ago, many researchers thought that research on mnemonics would not
yield useful knowledge about memory, or that such gimmicks were not
worthy of serious scientific study.
Incidentally, it is interesting to note that the skepticism of some
psychologists regarding the value of mnemonics is not limited to the
twentieth century. In 1888 a psychologist quoted the following from a
seventeenth-century document referring to teachers of mnemonics:
"Many there be that at this day profess the same, though they get more
infamy and disrepute than gain thereby; being a sort of rascally fellows
113

I
114

YOUR MEMORY

that do many times impose upon silly youth, only to draw some small
piece of money from them for present subsistence." The psychologist
then went on to say, "There is at least this difference between the
mnemonic teachers of Agrippa's time and those of the present. The
latter generally get, not a small piece of money but a larger piece, and
they sometimes impose upon others as well as silly youth."2
Research interest in mnemonics began in the mid-1960s, aided by
the return of mental processes as a legitimate area of scientific investigation (see chapter 4). Virtually all of the experimental research on
mnemonics has been published since then. By the early 1970s, several
respected psychologists and reputable researchers had suggested that
mnemonics should be taken seriously, and had encouraged research on
mnemonics. In 1973 mnemonics research finally earned its own heading—"Mnemonic Learning"—in Psychological Abstracts, and since then
about 20 references per year have been cited under the heading. By the
mid-1980s, there had been enough research on mnemonics tofilla book
consisting of 20 chapters, each reviewing an area of mnemonics research.
(I have written a more detailed account of the legitimacy and rise to
respectability of mnemonics research elsewhere.)3
However, there are psychologists, researchers, educators, and
others who still doubt the legitimacy of studying and using mnemonics.
Some of the reasons for their skepticism are valid limitations of mnemonics and some are not. This chapter discusses both kinds of limitations.
(Other psychologists have also analyzed the limitations and problems in
mnemonics research and applications.)4
SOME LIMITATIONS OF MNEMONICS
You learned in chapter 7 that you can work miracles with your memory
using mnemonics. However, you also learned in chapter 1 that there are
no memory techniques that are magical, all-powerful answers to all
learning and memory tasks. In addition to their power and strengths,
mnemonics also have weaknesses and limitations. Some of the limitations
of mnemonics are primarily a result of using visual imagery, and thus
apply primarily to visual mnemonics; other limitations apply also to verbal
mnemonics. The limitations include time constraints, abstract material,
learning versus retention, imagery ability, verbatim memory, decoding
interference, and transfer and maintenance.
Time
We saw in chapter 2 that visual memory processes may be somewhat
slower than verbal processes. It may take a little longer to think up an

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics

115

image of the object that is represented by a word than to think of the
word itself. Many studies have shown that you may not have time to form
images and associate them if material is presented too fast.5 Thus, visual
associations may not be an effective strategy when material is presented
too fast.
What is "too fast"? The Bag system (chapter 11) has been found to
be effective at a presentation rate of 4 or 8 seconds per item, but not at
2 seconds per item. Two seconds is apparently not long enough for the
unpracticed person to form effective visual associations. In using visual
or verbal associations, 5 seconds is typically sufficient study time to
produce retention for hours or days; for pictures (versus generated
images) 1 or 2 seconds may be sufficient. A difference of only 1 or 2
seconds per item (5 versus 6 seconds in one study, 3 versus 5 seconds
in another) has been found to make a significant difference in how well
visual associations help in remembering the items. Studies using visual
imagery in paired-associate learning typically give people at least 5
seconds per pair; when allowed to set their own rate, people average
about 7 seconds per pair. If verbal material is presented to you at the
rate of 1 or 2 seconds per item, you will probably not be able to use
visual imagery to remember it.6
It may be noted that you can improve your speed of making visual
associations with practice; the more people practice forming visual
associations, the less time it takes for them to do it. The average time
of 7 seconds per association is for people who are using visualization for
the first time. College students who were given more training than usual
were eventually able to use a mnemonic involving visual imagery (Keyword mnemonic) to learn German vocabulary at a 2.5-second rate as well
as they had first done with the mnemonic at a 10-second rate. In addition,
the time limitation does not matter in many practical learning tasks
because you can determine your own rate; the material does not come
one item at a time at a set rate. Finally, it should be noted that even
though it may take longer to go through some materials once using visual
associations than not using them, the overall learning time may be less
because you may not have to go back through the material as many times
to learn it.7
We have seen previously that any kind of coding to transfer material
from short-term memory to long-term memory takes time—whether it
be visualizing, chunking, associating, organizing, or seeking meaning.
Thus, the time limitation is not unique to mnemonic systems using visual
imagery (although time is a more serious problem for visual imagery with
abstract words than with concrete words, as discussed in the next
section). For example, people instructed to make up eight acrostics to
help them learn eight lists of six words took longer to learn the lists than

116

YOUR MEMORY

did people not using acrostics (although they remembered more words
on a later memory test for all eight lists).8
Retrieval time is another way in which time may limit the use of
mnemonics. It may take longer to decode a mnemonic association than
to just think of the information directly. There is some research evidence
that visual associations do require longer retrieval than rote remembering, but also that they will reach the same retrieval speed as rote
remembering with repeated practice.9
In addition to presentation time and retrieval time, mnemonics also
often require extra study time to learn the mnemonic itself. For example,
a system such as the Peg system (chapter 11) may not be worth the
extra time it takes to learn the system if it were to be used only once.
However, if it were used many times, the time saved in the subsequent
uses may outweigh the extra learning time accompanying the first use
(see "Mnemonics Give You More to Remember" later in this chapter).
The cost-effectiveness of mnemonics, in terms of time and effort to learn
relative to payoff, is still an open research question.10
Abstract Material
We saw in chapter 7 that you can use visual imagery to aid memory for
abstract terms by using concrete substitute words. However, the use of
concrete substitute words for abstract terms has at least three possible
limitations:
1. To form an image for abstract words takes somewhat longer
than for concrete words because of the extra step of thinking of a
concrete word to represent the abstract term.11
2. The substitute word is only a cue to remind you of the abstract
idea, and there is always the chance that you will remember the word
without remembering the idea it represents. It is possible that you might
recall the picture of the Liberty Bell or a judge or a smiling face and not
be able to recall that they represent liberty or justice or happiness. This
may be one reason why it has been found to be more difficult to decode
abstract mediators than concrete mediators.12
3. It may be very hard to form good concrete words for some
abstract terms and ideas (for example, assertion, theory, analysis, inference). Even if you can come up with some concrete words for such
terms, they may take inordinately long to construct and may not be very
good representations of the abstract terms they represent.
Although visual imagery can help you remember abstract material,
the above limitations suggest that verbal mediators may be more effective

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics

117

than visual mediators for some abstract material. Verbal mediators are
not as dependent on the concreteness of the material for their use. For
example, to associate theory and analysis you could say, "That theory is
worthy of analysis," but it would be hard to think of a good image for this
association. In addition, research has shown that verbal mediators do not
take more time for abstract terms than for concrete terms, as visual
mediators do.13
Learning Versus Retention
There is some debate among researchers as to whether mnemonics help
only learning or also help retention. In chapter 3 we saw that the rate of
forgetting depends on how well you learn something more than it does
on how fast you learn it; thus, it is possible to learn material faster
without necessarily retaining it longer. Some researchers have said that
although mnemonic techniques and systems help in learning material
faster they do not help in remembering it longer. In fact, it has been
claimed that we cannot really improve memory, but that memory systems work by improving learning. On the other hand, there are those
who say that mnemonics help a person remember material longer as well
as learn it faster. Reviews of the relevant research indicate that although
a few studies do show that imagery does not help long-term retention,
most studies show that imagery does help retention at least as much as
it helps learning.14
There are two considerations that we should keep in mind concerning this issue of learning versus retention. First, whether mnemonics
help retention depends on how retention is measured, and retention has
been measured different ways in different studies. A simple example
illustrates the differences. Suppose one group of people learned a list of
20 items using a mnemonic, and a second group learned the list without
using a mnemonic. After going through the list once, the first group
remembered an average of 18 items, and the second group remembered
an average of 12 items. Thisfindingwould indicate that the mnemonic
helped in learning the list better with one exposure. A week later, the
mnemonic group may remember 12 items and the other group, 8 items.
Did the mnemonic help retention a week later? Using the amount
remembered it did: The mnemonic group remembered 4 more items than
the other group (12 versus 8). Using the amount forgotten it did not: The
mnemonic group forgot 2 more items than the other group (6 versus 4).
Using the percentage remembered or forgotten there was no difference
between the two groups: They each forgot one-third of what they had
learned (6/18 versus 4/12).
The second consideration to keep in mind is that the issue of

118

YOUR MEMORY

learning versus retention may be an important theoretical distinction to
the researcher, but it may not make much practical difference to the
person doing the learning. Suppose that mnemonics did help learning
only, and that one group used a mnemonic system to learn material and
another group did not. Each group learned the material until they could
recite it perfectly once. Now, if mnemonics helped learning but not
retention, then we would expect that the two groups would remember
the same amount of material a week later. But the mnemonic group may
have taken only 15 minutes to learn the material and the other group
may have taken 30 minutes. (In one study with learning-disabled students, the mnemonic group learned twice as many science facts as a
direct-instruction group did in the same amount of time.)15 This means
that the mnemonics helped the people to make more efficient use of
their study time: They remembered as much as the other group with
only half as much study. Now suppose that both groups studied for 30
minutes. This would mean that the mnemonic group could then spend 15
minutes overlearning the material, so that they would have it learned
better and thus would retain it longer.
Imagery Ability
At the end of chapter 7 we saw that some adults are not accustomed to
thinking in images, so verbal mnemonics may come more naturally than
visual mnemonics. Perhaps this is because visualizing is harder work than
verbalizing, or perhaps as children acquire language skills they rely more
on verbal ability and less on imagery, or perhaps our culture and
educational system with its emphasis on facts and its verbal orientation
destroys the childhood reliance on imagery. Whatever the reason, there
is evidence that young children tend to rely on visual imagery for memory
more than older children and adults do.16
Even among adults, people differ in their habits of visual or verbal
thinking and in their imagery ability. We have seen that elderly people in
particular tend not to use visual imagery. Because many adults are not
used to picturing things, visualization may seem unnatural to them.
Those adults and children who do have the ability to use imagery have
been found to benefit more by instructions to make visual associations
than those who lack this ability. Thus, mnemonic systems using visual *
imagery may have limited usefulness for some adults.17
'
However, even though some people may not be in the habit of visual
thinking or have the current ability to use imagery effectively, mo^t
people do have the capacity to do so and can be trained to use imagery!
Use of visual imagery is a learned skill that requires instruction, training,

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics

119

and practice just like other memory skills.18 Adults, elderly adults, and
young children, as well as learning-disabled children, mentally retarded
and brain-damaged patients, and other inefficient learners, have all been
trained to use visual mnemonics effectively.19
People who can visualize well can benefit from the start by the
mnemonic systems; those who have difficulty visualizing may require
some time to develop the ability, but if they practice they can acquire the
skill. Some people do not do too well when they first try to use visual
associations to remember because they may not try as hard, or may
resort to other methods because they do not trust the procedure; the
reason is not that they are incapable of imagery. The few people who
cannot use visual imagery at all, and cannot learn to do so, may be able
to use mnemonic techniques involving verbal mediation; but the visual
imagery part of mnemonic systems may be less powerful for them.
Verbatim Memory
Some memory tasks may require word-for-word memorizing (for example, learning scriptures, poems, scripts, etc.). Mnemonic systems are
not especially appropriate for such verbatim memory tasks. When people
ask me how to memorize these kinds of materials verbatim, I refer them
to the memorizing strategies discussed in chapter 6. We will see in
subsequent chapters that mnemonic systems can help in remembering
the main points or ideas covered in such materials and in getting these
points in the right order, thus providing aframeworkwithin which the
exact words can then be learned. But the systems do not help much
directly in the word-for-word memory part of the task.
Interference
We have seen that mnemonic systems can reduce interference among
different sets of material. Now I will suggest that visual images may
actually increase interference. There is really no inconsistency, because
I am now talking about a different kind of interference.
An image may be easy to remember, but when used to remember
verbal material, the image must be decoded back into the appropriate
verbal response. The interference problem arises in recalling a concrete
noun that has synonyms that could be represented by the same picture;
thus, one picture could represent more than one word. For example, the
picture of a small child could also represent the words infant or baby; the
picture of a dog could also represent canine or wolf; and the picture of a
car could also represent automobile or vehicle.

120

YOUR MEMORY

This interference problem is most likely to arise when we are using
imagery to learn abstract material. For example, if we use an image of a
smiling face to represent the word happiness, then later when we recall
the smiling face we might think of smile, face, or head. A number of
studies indicate that although high imagery is superior to low imagery,
this kind of decoding error is more likely with visual images than with
verbal material alone.20
Maintenance and Transfer
Do people who are taught how to use mnemonics continue to use them
later on their own? Do they transfer their mnemonic skills to tasks other
than the one they were trained on? These two questions refer to the
problems of maintenance and transfer (or generalization), respectively.
Most research on such autonomous use of mnemonics has been done
with children, and has not been entirely encouraging. Even though
children who are very young or mentally retarded can be taught to use
mnemonics effectively for a particular task, they often fail to use the
mnemonics on their own on subsequent tasks and fail to generalize to
other tasks.21
Probably the most important factor influencing children's autonomous use of mnemonics is how much training and practice they receive
before they are left on their own. In most studies the children are given
brief instruction and little or no practice. Their transfer of a mnemonic
to new tasks increases when they are given comprehensive instructions
on how, when, why, and where to use the mnemonic and additional
practice with the mnemonic during instruction. With sufficient training
even kindergarten prereaders have been able to transfer a visual imagery
mnemonic to other similar tasks.22
Children's use of mnemonics on later tasks can be increased by
prompting, or being reminded to use the mnemonic on a task. The fact
that they often fail to think of using the mnemonic on their own indicates
that even though they have learned it well enough to use it, they may not
have learned it well enough for it to become ingrained in their habitual
way of remembering. Older children may not need as much prompting or
training as younger children; for example, eighth-grade children taught
to use a mnemonic were able to use the technique several weeks later
without being prompted.23
Some researchers have suggested that children's failure to use
mnemonics autonomously may not be a very serious problem. If the goal
is to increase the child's learning, then autonomous use is important only
if there is nobody or nothing around to prompt the child to use the

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics

121

mnemonic. The effectiveness of the mnemonic is the same whether
children use it on their own or only under instruction. When children are
learning in most natural settings, there is often someone around who
could provide such prompting (for example, parents or teachers).24
The problems of maintenance and transfer are not limited to children. I have found that adults may not continue to use mnemonics on
their own. For example, many studentsfrommy college memory courses
have reported a significant decline in use of their skills a few months after
completing the course (although their reported use was still higher than
it was before taking the course). Also, in one study in which we taught
elderly adults to use visual associations and the Peg system (chapter 11)
effectively, we found several months later that virtually none of them had
used it for anything since the study. Thisfindingis consistent with other
research that shows that most elderly adults who have been taught
imagery mnemonics do not use them when they are not reminded to do
so.25 In addition to how well they learned the mnemonic skills, level of
motivation and opportunity for use probably also play a significant role in
whether adults continue to use mnemonics.
It may be noted that this failure to continue to use new skills after
training is not limited just to mnemonics. Maintenance and transfer of
any kind of mental skill (learning strategies, creative thinking, problem
solving, etc.) is hard for children, and even for college students and
adults. Likewise, a constant problem for any kind of therapy, including
memory therapy, is the extent to which improvements observed in the
clinic actually generalize to the patient's everyday life.26 Research on
learning strategies has found that autonomous use of other learning and
memory skills can be increased in the same two ways as for mnemonics—
increased training and practice with strategies, and thorough explanation
of how and why they work and when to use them.27

SOME PSEUDO-LIMITATIONS OF MNEMONICS
This chapter so far has discussed some of the valid limitations and
problems of mnemonics. There are also "pseudo-limitations"—problems
and limitations that are not as valid as the ones just discussed, or that
are not as serious as some critics would have us believe. For example, a
recent book on how to study listed three main limitations of mnemonics:
material memorized by rote lacks understanding; mnemonic devices just
add to the memory's overall load; material learned through mnemonics
is soon forgotten.28 Thefirsttwo of these limitations are discussed in the
following sections; the third one does not need to be addressed.

122

YOUR MEMORY

One psychologist has observed that "like many things, mnemonic
techniques are easy to parody and poke fun at." But; he noted, that
makes them no less effective, "and there is nothing like success to
reinforce someone in a new method of learning." He also observed that
critics rarely make it explicit that the alternatives to mnemonics in
memorizing are either "dumb, blind repetition or simply outright failure,
and no one seems to want to champion these alternatives. "29 Critics of
mnemonics have suggested five limitations that I classify as pseudolimitations:30
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

They are not practical.
They do not aid understanding.
They give you more to remember.
They are crutches.
They are tricks.

Mnemonics Are Not Practical
Both the kinds of memory tasks studied in the research laboratory and
the kinds of memory demonstrations done by performers can contribute
to the impression that visual imagery mnemonics are not practical. In
the research laboratory, much research on visual imagery in verbal
learning and memory has concentrated on paired-associate and serial
learning of unrelated nouns. Although these paradigms are convenient
for psychological researchers, many people's practical memory problems
do not fit well within either paradigm.
People sometimes come up to me after a lecture and demonstration
in which I have performed one or more of the feats described at the
beginning of chapter 7, and say that they do not have much use for
remembering a long list of unrelated nouns or for memorizing a magazine.
After all, they are not planning to go on tour giving memory shows.
Many of them act as if they were watching a magic show rather than an
exhibition of applied psychology. Similarly, one memory textbook said of
mnemonics: "A major difficulty with many of these memory tricks is that
they are largely useful for recalling simple lists such as lists of grocery
items. This may help in a pinch, but in general they don't help a great
deal when it comes to the kinds of memories that play a major part in
everyday life."31
If, in fact, the memory tasks contained in research studies and in
demonstrations were all that mnemonics were good for, people might
have a good case for claiming that mnemonics have little practical value
in everyday life. After all, how often do you need to memorize a list of

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics

123

pairs of nouns, or a list of unrelated words, or a magazine? I anticipate
these objections in my teaching, and emphasize that mnemonic systems
are not just for research or for show. I point out to the audience what I
pointed out at the beginning of chapter 7—whether or not people want
to do such feats, the important point is that they can do them; and that
means they can also do other things with their memories that they do
want to do, but may have thought were beyond their abilities.
What are some of these "other things" that people can do with their
memories? Research has shown effective uses of mnemonic techniques
and systems for many areas of schoolwork (see chapter 14) as well as
for such other practical memory tasks as learning foreign languages,
overcoming absentmindedness, and remembering errands, people's
names, numbers (phone numbers, dates, etc.), scriptures, and advertisements. Researchers have suggested that the vocational domain is also
a fruitful domain for the application of mnemonics, and that in industrial
and military settings there is widespread need to memorize lists and
learn operational models. In fact, mnemonics have been developed for
areas of military training such as Morse code, signalflags,and orders to
sentries. In addition, mnemonics help not only for material in pairedassociate or list form, but also have been found to help in learning prose
material.32 Many of these applications, and others, are discussed in other
chapters.
The potential applicability of mnemonics beyond the research lab
and mnemonists' demonstrations is also suggested by the wide range of
people that have been able to use mnemonics effectively (see the section
on "Imagery Ability" earlier in this chapter). Many mnemonic techniques
and systems have been incorporated into memory rehabilitation therapy
for patients with acquired brain damage.33
As a final comment on practical uses of mnemonics, it may be noted
that what is "practical" depends on individual interests and needs. For
example, one person may see no practical need for memorizing lots of
people's names, while that ability may be very useful to someone who
deals with a lot of people (for example, a teacher or salesperson); one
person may see the ability to memorize numbers as impractical, while
another who works with measurements, prices, or schedules may find it
very useful; one person may not be interested in learning a foreign
language, while another one preparing to visit another country may find
it very useful; and memorizing a list of items may not be practical to
some people, but very useful to a waitress or short-order cook. Even
the educational uses of mnemonics may not seem as practical to someone
who is not in school. Thus, what is practical to one person may not be
practical to another.

124

YOUR MEMORY

Mnemonics Do Not Aid Understanding
Some people (and some psychology textbooks) have dismissed mnemonics with the comment that they are effective for certain kinds of rote
memory tasks, but that many learning tasks involve understanding
(comprehension) more than straight memory for facts. The implication
is that mnemonics are not worth learning because they do not help with
understanding.
There are two ways of responding to this criticism. First, the
statement that mnemonics cannot help with understanding may not be
entirely accurate. One psychologist has recently suggested that even
though imagery techniques are not often used to facilitate comprehension, they may have potential value for doing so, and some research
supports this suggestion. Research on mental elaboration in instruction
indicates that the images learners generate often increase both their
understanding and their memory, and that mnemonic pictures and diagrams given to learners can also facilitate both understanding and
memory.34 Visual imagery may be involved in the internal representation
of such abstract verbal concepts as clock time, monetary value, and
months of the year, and there is evidence that pictures and visual imagery
can help in understanding concepts and sentences and prose reading
material. Imagery mediation has been used in the development of broadbased programs for teaching cognitive strategies and in the training of
generalized cognitive strategies for learning. Mental imagery has even
been found to help in problem solving.35
But suppose that mnemonics do not help with understanding. In
fact, it is probably true that mnemonics are not as useful for comprehension tasks as they are for straight memory tasks. A second way of
responding to the criticism then is, So what? Mnemonics are not intended
for such tasks as reasoning, understanding, and problem solving; they
were not developed for that purpose. They are intended to aid learning
and memory. Should we discard something if it does not do what it is not
intended to do as effectively as it does what it is intended to do?
In chapter 1, an analogy was drawn between memory tools and
carpentry tools. It was pointed out that what a hammer does, it does
very powerfully, but it is not intended to do everything. We would not
discard it because it does not saw boards or turn screws. Similarly,
mnemonics enable people to do amazing feats that cannot be done with
the unaided memory; and what they are supposed to do, they do very
powerfully. It is not valid to criticize mnemonics because they are not as
powerful in doing what they are not supposed to do.
To say that mnemonic systems are not worth using because many

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics

125

learning tasks do not involve straight memory is somewhat like saying
that the multiplication tables are not worth learning because many math
problems do not involve multiplication, or that Spanish is not worth
learning because many people do not speak Spanish. There are also
many math problems that do involve multiplication and many people who
do speak Spanish. Likewise, it is true that many tasks do not involve
straight memory, but it is also true that many tasks do involve straight
memory. Whether we like it or not, most of us have many things to
remember—names, phone numbers, things to do, things to buy, addresses, dates, errands, speeches, reports, and schoolwork. Thus, even
if mnemonics did help only remembering and not understanding, many
people may still have enough to remember to make the use of memory
aids worthwhile. (See chapter 14 for a discussion of remembering and
understanding in school.)
The experiences of the Russian mnemonist S, described in chapter
3, have been used as an example of how mnemonics not only may not
help understanding but may actually interfere with it. S used visual
imagery to remember everything: Given a list of numbers that had an
inherent pattern, he did not see the pattern; rather, he remembered the
list by visualizing the numbers. This finding has led some people to a
conclusion such as that made by one psychologist: "Apparently, the
mnemonist exhibited little talent for abstract thinking, which is not
unexpected considering that mnemonic techniques use concrete methods
of organization and hence interfere with organizing information according
to abstract principles."36 The implication is that our use of mnemonics
will also interfere with our ability to see and understand abstract patterns
and principles.
However, S was compelled by his cognitive style to form visual
images; he could not help it. Just because we choose to use mnemonics
to impose meaning on some material does not mean that we will not be
able to learn other material that is meaningful without mnemonics; nor
does using mnemonics on unorganized material mean that we must also
use them on organized material.
Mnemonics Give You More to Remember
Most mnemonic techniques and systems actually increase the amount of
material you must remember. Mnemonic systems require you to memorize material constituting a mental filing system in addition to the
information to be remembered. In fact, that is the meaning of the word
elaboration when psychologists talk of visual and verbal elaboration. For
example, to use the Loci system (chapter 10) to memorize a series of

126

YOUR MEMORY

10 items, you must remember 10 locations in addition to the 10 items to
be remembered. This fact has led some critics to suggest that the
systems are actually more work than it would be just to learn the
information by itself (something like determining the number of horses
in a herd by counting the number of legs and dividing by four).
It is true that most mnemonic systems do add to the amount of
material to be remembered, and as a result they may require extra effort
when they are first being learned. But this extra effort may be illusory
for three reasons:
1. Once the locations (or other mnemonic elaborations) are
learned, they are used over and over to learn new material. One does
not memorize a new set of locations for each list to be remembered.
Thus, the extra effort of learning the locations occurs only once.
2. No matter how it is done, remembering is work, and memory
aids are not necessarily supposed to make it easy, just more effective
(as noted in chapter 1). Learning to use mnemonics is a skill that requires
practice just like acquiring any other skill. For example, when a person
is first learning to use a typewriter, typing may be slower than writing
and may seem that it is more trouble that it is worth; but typing is more
efficient than writing once the person masters the skill. Or a golfer may
find that learning a new grip or a new swing may hinder her game at first,
but if she keeps practicing it she will find that her game improves.
Similarly, mnemonic systems may seem at first to be more trouble than
they are worth, but people who have made the effort to learn them and
get used to using them usually report that they are worth the effort. The
extra effort of learning a system can be partially offset by the fact that it
may now take less time and effort to learn other material than it does
without a system. People who used visual mnemonics to remember a list
of sayings or a list of errands reported that the task was easier than did
people who did not use the mnemonics.37
3.. Memory capacity is not a function of the amount of material to
be learned as much as it is a function of other factors, such as how
organized or meaningful the material is. For example, we saw in chapter
2 that the number of chunks is more important than the number of items:
You can remember a sentence containing 40 letters better than a series
of 10 unrelated letters. We also saw in chapter 7 that a sentence such as
"The set fell off the table" is actually easier to remember when concrete
details are added ("The ivory chess set fell off the table").
Other studies have also found that adding relevant details to a
sentence improves memory for the sentence. For example, sentences
such as the following were found to be easier to remember when the

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics

127

parts in parentheses were added: The fat one bought the padlock (to
place on the fridge door); The bald one cut out the coupon (for the hair
tonic); The funny one admired the ring (that squirted water). In another
study people were given facts about famous people: "At a critical point in
his life, Mozart made a journey from Munich to Paris." Some facts had
relevant details added: "Mozart wanted to leave Munich to avoid a romatic
entanglement." The people recalled more facts when given added details
than when facts were presented alone.38
Thus, the amount of material to be remembered is not the primary
concern in assessing memory capacity. Once a person learns the additional material involved in acquiring a mnemonic system, he usually finds
that the advantages in terms of organization and meaningfulness outweigh
the disadvantage of having additional material to remember.
Mnemonics Are Crutches
Some people criticize mnemonics on the basis that a person may become
dependent on a mnemonic and use it as a memory crutch. (In fact, one
psychologist referred to a mnemonic as an "artificial memory-crutch.")
Then he will not be able to remember the material without the crutch.
That is, a person who memorizes a given set of material with a mnemonic
will become dependent on that mnemonic to remember that material.
For example, how many people can remember the number of days in
November without going through the rhyme, "Thirty days has September, April, June, and November. . .."? The critic says, "What happens if
you forget the crutch?"
There are at least three responses to this question:
1. The "crutch" itself is frequently not forgotten as easily as the
items would be without the crutch. People may remember some mnemonics long after they have forgotten the material. One psychologist
learned a rhyme from a friend for memorizing n to 20 decimal places;
later he still remembered the rhyme but had to telephone his friend to
remember how to decode it into the appropriate digits. Similarly, some
people can remember the sentence they used to memorize the names of
the cranial nerves ("On Old Olympus' Towering 1bps . . .," chapter 7)
long after they have forgotten the names of the nerves. However,
remembering the mnemonic is not responsible for their having forgotten
the material.
2. Such dependencyfrequentlydoes not happen. It is possible that
it can happen with some material that a person does not learn very

128

YOUR MEMORY

thoroughly and/or use very often. However, especially if the material is
something that a person will be using regularly, he will eventually find
that he no longer needs to recall the original mnemonic association in
order to recall the material.39 The material may come automatically. I
can recall material that I learned years ago using mnemonics, but I
cannot remember some of the associations I originally used to learn the
material.
3. Even if a person, did become dependent on a mnemonic to
remember certain material, is that bad? Is it undesirable for a person
with poor eyesight to become dependent on eyeglasses to help him see
better? Even a person with good eyesight may need a telescope to see
distant objects clearly. Is that worse than not being able to see the
distant objects? Is it worse for a person to depend on mnemonic
associations to remember the names of everyone he meets than to forget
their names? I used the Phonetic system (chapter 12) to memorize the
telephone numbers of more than 100 people in a group to which I belong.
I must refer to my mnemonic associations to remember all of the
numbers, but is this worse than not remembering the numbers? I do not
think so. Even if the crutch criticism of dependency were true, it may be
better to remember material using a mnemonic than to not remember
the material.
An irony of the crutch criticism is that it actually serves as the basis
for two conflicting criticisms. On one hand, the critic says that you cannot
remember the material without the crutch (meaning that you are lost if
you forget the crutch). On the other hand, the critic says that you
become too dependent on the crutch for remembering the material
(meaning that you cannot forget the crutch).
Another aspect of the crutch criticism involves a general dependency
on mnemonics. It is the argument that a person who gets in the habit of
using mnemonics may not be able to learn material without mnemonics.
As one psychologist explained it: "Some success with mnemonics may
set up a vicious circle: The more we use them, the more we need them,
and the more we are inclined, or even forced, to be perfunctory in our
attempts to understand new information."40 Luria's S is often used as an
example of how a dependency on mnemonics can lead to a failure to be
able to learn without mnemonics (but see the discussion of S in the
section on mnemonics and understanding).
Actually, the appropriate use of mnemonics can lead to greater selfconfidence in other remembering, rather than making a person a helpless
memory cripple. The following comments of two of my memory students
are representative of many:

The Legitimacy of Mnemonics 147
I have found that mnemonic devices have not only helped me in the obvious ways,
but have also improved my sensitivity to my normal memory. Now when I go to
use the rote system, Ifindit easier because of the self-confidence that mnemonics gave to me.
Ifindmyself going about my daily activities applying mnemonics to every situation
that I possibly can. I find myself in return to be more effective and more
organized, and to have a considerable amount of self-confidence that I had not
experienced before.
Mnemonics Are Tricks
Isaac Asimov described an experience which illustrates a view of intelligence that is similar to some people's view of memory. When Asimov
buys several objects at a store, he watches the clerk write the numbers
on a slip of paper (for example, $1.55, $1.45, $2.39, and $2.49) and
automatically mutters the total—$7.88. When the clerk finishes his
addition and gets $7.88, he looks up in awe and says, "That's amazing.
You must be very smart to be able to do a thing like that." Then Asimov
explains how to do it. "You don't add $1.45 and $1.55. You take 5 cents
from one and add it to the other so you have $1.50 and $1.50 which
comes to $3.00 at once. Then instead of adding $2.39 and $2.49 you add
a penny to each and add $2.40 and $2.50, which comes to $4.90,
remembering that you will have to remove the pennies you added. The
$3.00 and the $4.90 are $7.90, and when you take off the two pennies,
you have $7.88 and that's your answer. If you practice that sort of thing,
you can. . ."
At about this point, Asimov has to stop because he cannot ignore
the clerk's cold stare as the clerk says, "Oh, it's just a trick." Asimov
observed, "Not only am I no longer intelligent, I am nothing but a faker.
To the average person, in other words, understanding the properties of
numbers and using those properties is not intelligent. Performing mechanical operations is intelligent."41
In doing memory demonstrations, I have observed some people
react like the clerk in Asimov's story. They are impressed by my amazing
memory until I explain a little about the mnemonic system used, at which
time I no longer have an amazing memory but am just a faker. (Perhaps
this is why some memory "experts" do not divulge their secrets.) To
some people understanding the principles of memory and applying them
via mnemonic techniques is not memorizing. Rote repetition and drill is
memorizing. I have several memory and psychology textbooks published
in the 1980s that refer to mnemonics as "tricks," and some psychologists
refer to mnemonics as "artificial memory."

130

YOUR MEMORY

The distinction between "natural" memory and "artificial" memory
aids may be an artificial distinction; the distinction between what is
natural memory and what is artificial memory is often not clear, and
there may be more similarities than there are differences (see "Basic
Principles of Mnemonics" in chapter 7).42 It seems to me that the
natural-artificial distinction stems in part from equating "unaided" with
"natural"; but unaided rote rehearsal feels no more natural to many
people than do their attempts to impose meaning on material.
The view that rote repetition and drill is real remembering and the
use of mnemonics is artificial can lead to the claim that the use of
mnemonics is unfair. Since a mnemonic is a trick or gimmick, it is not
fair to use a mnemonic system because you are not really remembering.
The 12-digit number for memorizing the calendar is a good example: You
have not really memorized all 365 dates; therefore, you have not really
memorized the calendar for a year. This argument seems to be saying
that you are cheating if you do not do things the hard way. You are
cheating to use an aid. Actually, the "unfairness" to the critics may lie in
the fact that you can remember so much more than they can. It is no
less fair to use aids to train the memory than it is to use special training
techniques to train long-distance runners, keyboard-learning aids to
teach piano lessons, or a mathematical formula tofindthe circumference
of a circular field given the diameter. (Is it somehow more "fair" to walk
around thefieldand measure it with a tape measure than to just use the
formula c = rcd?)
It was noted at the beginning of the chapter that viewing mnemonics
as tricks and gimmicks probably contributed to the hesitancy of many
psychologists to accept mnemonics as a legitimate area of investigation.
It is probably also one reason people applaud a memory demonstration
as if it were a magic show (after all, magicians do tricks) rather than a
demonstration of applied psychology. Unfortunately, some commercial
memory trainers contribute to, and even encourage, this image. One
memory course that uses parts of an automobile as the basis for a Loci
system (see chapter 10) is titled "Auto-magic," and another commercial
course is titled "Memory Magic."

Mental Filing Systems: Link
and Story Mnemonics

I

n chapter 7 mnemonic "techniques" and mnemonic "systems" were
distinguished. The examples of mnemonics discussed so far in this
book illustrate specific-purpose techniques. For example, the "1492..."
verse helps us remember when Columbus discovered America, but it
does not help remember other dates. "I before e . . . " helps us remember
how to spell words with ie in them, but it does not help spell other
words. HOMES helps us remember the names of the Great Lakes, but
it does not help remember other names. Of course, other rhymes and
acronyms can be constructed to remember other dates, spelling words,
and names, but these particular mnemonics lack generality; they can be
applied only for one purpose.
Mnemonic systems are more general-purpose methods that can be
applied to different kinds of memory tasks; they are not limited to only
one set of material, but can be used over and over to learn different
material. Chapters 9 through 12 discuss five mnemonic systems—Link,
Story, Loci, Peg, and Phonetic. Each of these four chapters has three
major sections. The first section describes and explains the mnemonic
system. The second section describes some recent research evidence
concerning how well the system works, to give you confidence in its
effectiveness. The third section suggests some ways you might be able
to use the system in practical memory tasks.
131

132

YOUR MEMORY

All of the principles, characteristics, applications, strengths, and
limitations of mnemonics in chapters 7 and 8 apply to mnemonic systems
as well as to mnemonic techniques. After you have read chapters 9
through 12, read chapters 7 and 8 again; many of the points regarding
mnemonics will be even more meaningful when you are familiar with the
mnemonic systems.
YOUR MENTAL FILING SYSTEM
In chapter 1 the efficiency of an organized 3" x 5" file box was compared
with a larger unorganized box as filing systems in discussing the capacity
of memory. Then in chapter 2 the analogy of a mental filing system was
used in discussing short-term and long-term memory. Mnemonic systems may be viewed quite literally as mental filing systems. They allow
you to store information in your memory in a way that you will be able to
find it and get it back out when you want it.
Suppose you were asked to go to your local library and get a certain
book. Even though the library may have thousands of books, the task
would not be too hard because the books are filed systematically. You
would go to the card or computer catalog, look up the call number of the
bopk, and then go to the part of the library where that number was
located and get the book (unless your luck is like mine, in which case the
book would probably be checked out).
Now suppose all the books in that library were dumped into one big
pile in the parking lot or on the street, and you were asked to get a
certain book. Your task would be much more difficult. Why? The pile
contains the same number of books as the library, but the difference is
that you now have no systematic way to locate a particular book. You
have to search through all the books tofinda particular one.
Similarly, suppose you are given a list of 10 items to remember.
Later, when the time comes for recall, you begin looking through your
memory for the 10 items. For most people the task is likefindinga book
in a pile of thousands of books. You know the 10 items were put in your
memory somewhere. But you know thousands of words; how can you
systematically search through all these words and identify the 10 you are
looking for? Unless the items were originally stored in some systematic,
orderly manner, you have no good way to systematically search for them.
For people who use a mnemonic system to learn the 10 items, the task
is more like finding a book in a library. They have stored the items in
such a way that they can identify them and cue themselves as to where
the items are.
When you are trying to find items in your memory, a mnemonic
system can help in at least three ways as a mentalfilingsystem:

Mental Filing Systems: Link and Story Mnemonics

133

1. It will give you a place to start your search, a way to locate the first
item.
2. It will give you a way of proceeding systematically from one item to
the next.
3. It will let you know when your recall is finished, when you have
reached the last item.
Even for material that you know very well, you may have a hard time
without steps 2 and 3. For example, we saw in chapter 4 that if you try
to recite the alphabet in random order you are likely tofindthat you are
lost by the time you are halfwayfinished.You are not sure which letters
you have named or how many you have named—problems that do not
occur when you recite the letters in alphabetical order.
WHAT IS THE LINK SYSTEM?
The Link system, which could also be called the "Chain system," consists
of two steps. First, form a visual image for each item in the list to be
learned. Second, associate the image for each item with the image for
the next item. Thus, you form a visual association between thefirsttwo
items, then between the second and third items, then between the third
and fourth items, and so on. You do not try to associate every item with
every other item in one big picture; rather, you associate the items two
at a time. The reason for the name of this system should be obvious:
You are linking the items together to form a chain of associations.
The Link system is the most elementary, of the mnemonic systems.
In fact, it may really be too simple to be called a "system." I sometimes
describe the Link system when I give a short lecture on mnemonics,
because, although it is simple, it is adequate to illustrate the principles
on which mnemonic systems are based and how powerful they can be for
appropriate kinds of material. The Link system is appropriate for serial
learning tasks, where you have a series of items to remember: The Link
system helps you remember all the items in order.
Much of the discussion on mnemonics in chapters 7 and 8 was
illustrated with paired-associate learning, but serial learning is really not
very different. Serial learning can be viewed as a series of pairedassociate tasks where each item in the list serves first as the response
to the previous item and then as the cue for the next item. For example,
suppose we have four items identified by the letters A, B, C, and D. A
paired-associate task would consist of two pairs, A-B and C-D. You would
be cued with A arid C and would respond by recalling B and D. A serial
learning task would consist of the series A-B-C-D, which could be viewed
as consisting of three pairs—A-B, B-C, and C-D. Thus, serial learning

134

YOUR MEMORY

is similar to paired-associate learning, so that everything discussed
previously on remembering pairs of items is also relevant to the Link and
Story systems.
As an example of the Link system, suppose you were given a list
that begins with the following five items: paper, tire, doctor, rose, ball.
To use the Link system in remembering thesefiveitems, you first form
a visual association relating paper andtire.You might picture a car driving
on paper tires, or using a tire to erase writing from a paper. Next
associate tire and doctor. You might picture a tire running over a doctor,
or a tire performing an operation. To associate doctor and rose, you might
picture a doctor operating on a rose, or a doctor giving roses to a
patient. To associate rose and ball, you might picture two people playing
catch with a rose, or balls growing on a rose bush. Of course, it may be
just as easy for some people to remember onlyfiveitems without using
a system; however, the procedure is the same whether you have 5 items
or 50 items.
The visual associations I have suggested for these five items are
some possibilities that come to my mind; they may not be the most
memorable ones for you. We have seen that both visual and verbal
mediators tend to be more effective if you think thlem up yourself than if
they are given, to you by someone else. Some of the associations I
suggested above are bizarre and some are plausible. If you like bizarreness, you can use bizarre images; if not, you can use plausible ones as
long as they are vivid and interacting. Generally, you should use the first
association that comes to your mind, because it will likely also be the
first one to come to your mind when you want to recall the items.
Whatever your association is, use the guides and principles discussed in
chapter 7 to form good images and effective visual associations.
Whenever I read a list of items to an audience so that they can try
using the Link system, or any other mnemonic system, I emphasize two
additional points. I first tell them, "Make sure you actually see each of
your associations, even if it is only a brief second. If it helps at first to
cut out distractions, close your eyes." Then I tell them, "After I have
given you several items you are going to start worrying about forgetting
thefirstfew items, and you will want to go back and review them. Don't
go back and review, or you will miss the new associations. Just concentrate on making a good association for each item as it comes, and trust
your memory that you will be able to get the items back when you want
them."
To recall a list that you have learned with the Link system, you
begin with the first item and proceed in order as each item leads to the
next one. For our example, think of paper; see the image that involves

Mental Filing Systems: Link and Story Mnemonics

135

paper; and it reminds you of tire; tire leads to doctor; doctor leads to
.rose; and rose leads to ball.
In the Link system each item is cued by the previous item except
for the first one. You need some way to cue yourself to remember the
first item. One way to do this is to associate thefirstitem with something
that is related to the list and that is easy to remember. For example, you
might associate the first word with the source of the list: If a person is
giving you the list, associate the first item on the list with that person
(that is what I tell my students to do when I read a list to them); if the
list comes from a textbook, associate thefirstitem with the book. If the
list is a shopping list, associate thefirstitem with the door to the store.
WHAT IS THE STORY SYSTEM?
The Story system is a variant of the Link system in which you weave the
items into a connecting story. It is an extension of the use of sentences
as mediators in paired-associate tasks; you just continue with additional
sentences to form a story based on the items you want to remember.
For example, you might use something like the following for the previous
five-item list: The paperboy rolled a tire down the sidewalk, and it hit the
doctor coming to make a house call (now that's a bizarre idea!); it knocked
him into a rosebush, where he picked up a ball and threw it at the boy.
The procedure for recalling items learned with the Story system is
essentially the same as with the Link system. Begin with the first item
and proceed through the story, picking the key words out as you come
to them.
Although the Story system is very similar to the Link system, there
are at least four differences:1
1. In the Link system you link each pair of items independently of the
previous links; in the Story system you link the items in a continuous,
integrated sequence. This logical sequence may be an advantage of
the Story system over the Link system for some people whofindit
easier to recall a story than a series of unrelated associations.
2. The Story system may require a little more time to make each
association than the Link system does, because you must think of an
association that fits the narrative of the story rather than using the
first association that comes to your mind.
3. The longer the list, the harder it is to work each succeeding item
into an integrated story. Most people find it hard to put together a
story to remember a list of 20 items. However, it is not much harder
to use the Link system on a list of 20 items than on a list of 10 items.

136

YOUR MEMORY

4. Items learned by the Link system can be recalled in backward order
almost as well as forward, but items woven into a story may be
harder and take longer to recall backward.
The Story system can be used effectively in verbal form without
accompanying visual imagery, but it is probably more powerful if you
actually picture the events happening as you think of them. In fact, the
Link system also can be used with verbal mediators by a person who
cannot use visual imagery. (Verbal associations may also be effectively
used in the mnemonic systems discussed in subsequent chapters).2 If
you use verbal mediators for the Link or Story systems, then you may
be able to apply them more directly to abstract material without having
to use concrete substitute words.
HOW WELL DO THE LINK AND STORY SYSTEMS WORK?
Several research studies up to the mid-1970s found that the Link and
Story systems can be effective in learning and remembering word lists.
People using the Link system typically remembered 2 to 3 times as many
words from a 20-word list as did people who were not taught the system.
Similarly, people using the Story system to learn a dozen or more lists
of 10 words remembered 2 to 7 times as many words as did people not
using the system. The research also found that the Story system could
be used effectively on abstract words (although not quite as effectively
as on concrete words), and even that sentences strung together as
stories were remembered better than when they were presented as
unrelated sentences.3
Recent research has supported some of the older findings and
produced a few new insights into the Link and Story systems. Some of
the recentfindingson the Link system include:4
1. The same list of 20 words was learned and recalled in a new order
every few minutes for 5 times with surprisingly few errors, as
compared with people learningfivedifferent lists.
2. Instructing people in the Link system reduced the range of differences among people but did not eliminate the differences. (Recall of
people using the Link system ranged from 55 to 97 percent versus
29 to 95 percent for those not using the Link system.)
3. The Link was effective for 12 words in immediate recall but not one
week later.
4. The Link system was more effective than just imagery or rehearsal
in a free recall task, but its effectiveness was even greater when the
order of recall of the words was considered.

Mental Filing Systems: Link and Story Mnemonics

137

5. People who were given some practice using the Link system (which
they are usually not given in research studies) were able to improve
their performance to where they could soon remember lists of 30 to
40 words.
Most of these recent studies, like the earlier ones, used word lists.
One of the mnemonists (T.E.) described in chapter 3 who had an
exceptional memory for stories used the Link system and substitute
words. In a study to see if the Link system could be used to remember
errands, or things to do, college students were given a list of 22 errands
to remember (get a haircut, get gas in the car, etc.). They heard the list
once with a 10-second pause after each errand. The students who had
been taught the Link system remembered significantly more errands
than those not taught the system. Students from the second group who
used their own visual imagery mnemonic also recalled significantly more
errands than did the other students (about the same as the students who
were taught the Link system).5
Several studies on the Story system have also found it to be effective
for elementary school children and college students, for immediate and
delayed memory, and for free recall, serial recall, and recognition.
Experimenter-provided stories were found to be effective for remembering five lists of six words each. However, although studies have found
that the Story system helps in learning several short lists (up to 16
words), the findings for learning a longer list (up to 30 words) have been
mixed; some research found that self-generated stories were effective
for a long list, but one study did not.6
The Link and Story systems have also been found to be effective in
a nonwestem culture and for special populations. The Link system was
used effectively by college students in India. A story helped chronic
organic amnesiac patients remember word lists; they improved as much
as the normal comparison group, although their recall was lower. Other
research compared acronyms and the Story, Link, and Loci systems
(chapter 10) for word lists with normal people and with brain-damaged
patients. The Link and Story systems were both found to be more
effective than no method, and the Story system was the most effective
mnemonic for both groups for recall 24 hours later.7
Demonstrations
In addition to the research studies, demonstrations by my audiences and
memory students show the effectiveness of the Link and Story systems.
I frequently use the Link system to help people demonstrate to themselves the power of visual association, because I can explain the system

138

YOUR MEMORY

to them in about 5 minutes and let them try it. I read to them a list of 20
words to remember, and have them write as many as they can recall in
order. Then I teach them the Link system. Finally, I read to them a
second list of 20 words to remember using the Link system, and have
them recall as many as they can in order. Very few people recall all 20
words from the first list (those who do generally use some kind of
mnemonic technique). However, after learning the Link system, about
half the audience generally recalls all 20 words from the second list.
Many of them are astounded at their own performance.
In my memory course I give my students several memory tests
during the first couple of class periods, and then give them the same
tests later in the course. One of the tests is the same one I described
for my lecture audiences—to remember a list of 20 words after hearing
them once at a rate of one word every 10 seconds. The following
summarizes the performance of about 100 students in several recent
classes: Before learning the Link and Story systems, 18 percent of the
students recalled all 20 words. (Most of the 18 percent used the Link or
Story system or a similar mnemonic that they had learned before the
class.) Several weeks later, using the systems, the percentage of
students recalling all 20 words increased threefold to 54 percent. At the
other end of the performance scale, the percentage of students recalling
fewer than 14 words was 40 percent before learning the systems and 15
percent after learning the systems.
These results from my memory classes are more striking than
those found in some research studies because of several procedural
differences. For example, I give my students about 10 seconds per word;
this presentation rate is slower than that used in most research studies.
Also, the same people learn both lists of words (one list before learning
the systems and one using the systems), rather than comparing some
people who used the system with others who did not use it, as is done
in most research studies.
Thus, there is considerable evidence that the Link and Story
systems really can make a difference in memory. It is important to note
also that people in the research studies and some of the demonstrations
were using the systems for the first time. With practice, you could
expect to become even more effective in using the systems. (This
consideration also applies to the research on the Loci, Beg, and Phonetic
systems discussed in the next three chapters.)

Mental Filing Systems: Link and Story Mnemonics

139

HOW CAN YOU USE THE LINK AND STORY SYSTEMS?
After hearing these systems described to this point some people wonder
about their use, because most people do not need to memorize a list of
20 unrelated words. Of course, if this were the only application, then the
systems would probably not be worth the effort of learning them (except
perhaps to amaze your friends). What are* some practical situations in
which the systems could be used?
Lists
The Link and Story systems can be used in almost any situations where
you want to remember lists of things. This may seem to be rather
restrictive, but actually there are many kinds of everyday memory tasks
that involve serial learning, or even free recall where the order of the
items is not important (the systems just order the items to help recall
them). One category would include shopping lists and lists of things to
do. The use for shopping lists is fairly straightforward—just link the
items on the list. One woman who attended one of my lectures reported
later that since she had started using the Link system, she hardly ever
wrote down her shopping lists anymore. Not only did the Link system
enable her to remember the items but she had more fun doing it that
way.
The use of the Link or Story system for lists of things to do may
not be quite as straightforward as for shopping lists, but the procedure
is the same. Suppose that you need to do the following tasks tomorrow:
Call the newspaper office about your subscription, get the flat tire on
your car fixed, go to the doctor's office, have some roses sent to a
friend, and pick up the tickets for the upcoming ball game. To help you
remember these items, you might pick a key word to represent each of
these tasks: paper, tire, doctor, rose, and ball (Do these words look
familiar?) Then link the words together or weave them into a story, as
described at the beginning of this chapter.
The systems can also be used for learning material that consists of
separate, ordered parts, such as the amendments to the Constitution,
the Ten Commandments, or the names of the presidents. The procedure
for such a task is to pick a key word representing each item and then link
the words together or form a story with them. For example, to remember the Ten Commandments you might link the following: One god,
graven image, swearing, Sabbath, parents, kill, adultery, steal, lie, covet.
You could use concrete substitute words and their pictures to represent

140

YOUR MEMORY

the terms that are abstract; thus, you might picture a church meeting to
represent Sabbath and a person whose face is green with envy and who
has dollar signs in his eyes to represent covet.
The procedure for remembering a series of people's names would
be similar, and can be illustrated by the experience of a woman who
attended one of my lectures. She reported that she had used the Link
system to learn the 12 apostles named in the New Testament for a
Sunday School lesson she was giving. She made up a substitute word to
represent each of the names (mat for Matthew, beater for Peter, etc.)
and linked them together. Then she surprised her class (and herself) by
being able to name all 12 men in order. Other students of mine have
done the same thing with the names of the books in the Old and New
Testaments.
Remember that items to be remembered by the Link or Story
systems do not necessarily have to have a natural order to them. A wife
may think of things that she wants her husband to do when he comes
home, link the first task to him, and link each succeeding task in the
order they come to her mind (take out the garbage, mow the lawn,
replace the hall light bulb, etc.). Similarly, she may use the same,
procedure to remember things that happened during the day to tell him
(a letter came from his folks, their son got an "A" on his homework, the
dog had puppies, etc.).
The Story system using substitute words has been used to remember the names of the cranial nerves (an alternative to the acrostic we
learned in chapter 7—"On Old Olympus'. . ."):
At the oil factory (olfactory nerve) the optician (optic) looked for the occupant
(oculomotor) of the truck (trochlear). He was searching because three gems
(trigeminal) had been abducted (abducens) by a man who was hiding his face
(facial) and ears (auditory). A glossy photograph (glossopharyngeal) had been
taken of him, but it was too vague (vagus) to use. He appeared to be spineless
(spinal accessory) and hypocritical (hypoglossal).8
A similar example of a use of the Story system is the following story
used to remember the names of the 13 original states in the order they
entered the Union:
A ladyfromDelaware bought a ticket on the Pennsylvania railroad. She packed a
new jersey sweater in her suitcase, and went to visit her friend Georgia in
Connecticut The next morning she ^nd herfriendattended mass in a church on
Mary's land. Then they took the South car line home, and dined on a new ham,
which had been roasted by Virginia (the cookfromNew York). After dinner they
took the North car line and rode to the island.9

Mental Filing Systems: Link and Story Mnemonics

141

A student in one of my memory classes, who was a second-grade
teacher, tried this story with her students and was so impressed with
how fast they learned the states that she called the principal in to see
what the children had accomplished in such a short time. Two weeks
later, with some intermittent review, 26 of the 33 children could still
recall at least 12 of the 13 states.
A kind of Story method can even be used to learn equations, such
as the equation for changing Fahrenheit (F) temperature to Centigrade
(C): F = 9/5C + 32. The sentence is "Friday (F) is the same ( = ) 9 to
5 (9/5) drag in College (C); but I've only got 32 minutes (32) to go!"10
Speeches or Reports
Another possible use of the Link or Story system is for remembering
speeches. (Bishop Fulton J. Sheen said that the reason he spoke without
notes was because an old Irish lady watching a bishop read his sermon
remarked, "If he can't remember it, how does he expect us to?")11
Suppose you want to make the following points in a speech to your local
PTA group: A traffic light should be installed at the intersection by the
school; a fence should be constructed along the side of the playground
by the street; funds need to be raised to buy more musical instruments
for the school; classrooms are too crowded; some changes should be
made in the route of the school bus; and the media section of the library
needs expanding.
The first step in using the Link or Story system to remember your
points is to pick a concrete key word to represent each point: traffic
light, fence, musical instruments, crowded classroom, bus, audiovisual
supplies. (You may want to be more specific and use trombones for
musical instruments and videotapes for audiovisual supplies.) Once you
pick your key words, you just link them in the order you want to talk
about them.
Mark Twain reportedly tried several systems for remembering his
speeches. Finally, he hit on the idea of creating visual images. He would
actually draw the pictures representing his ideas. Here is an example.
First a haystack with a wiggly line under it to represent a rattlesnake—to remind
him to begin talking about ranch life in the West. Then there were slanting lines
with what must be an umbrella under them and the Roman numeral II. That
referred to a great wind that would strike Carson City every afternoon at 2
o'clock.
Next came a couple of jagged lines, lightning, obviously telling him it was
time to move on to the subject of weather in San Francisco, where the point was
that there wasn't any lightning, or thunder either, he noted.

142

YOUR MEMORY

From that day, Twain spoke without notes, and the system never Med him.
He drew a picture of each section of his speech, all strung out in a row, then he'd
look at them and destroy them. When he spoke, there was the row of images
fresh and sharp in his mind. He'd make notes based on the remarks of a previous
speaker—just insert another picture in the set of images.12
Twain's system was so good, he said, that 25 years after he had
given a speech he could remember the whole thing by a single act of
recall. Of course, you will be able to recognize Twain's system as an
application of the Link and Story systems.
The same system for learning your speech could be applied also to
remembering speeches other people give, or to remembering lectures in
school. You can link the points together in order as the speaker covers
them. Of course, this requires skill at forming associations rapidly, and
also requires that you concentrate on the speech to be able to select the
key points. With practice, you may even be able to apply the same
procedure to remembering what you read.13
Other Uses
Experiences reported by several students in my memory class suggest
that the Link and Story systems can be used profitably in school. One
student used the Link system to help him complete a self-paced physics
course. The course employed a 24-chapter textbook, a 6-unit study
guide, a series of films on the major units, and optional filmed lectures.
The student linked the information under each unit to acquire a chain pf
information relating to each unit, and then associated each chain to the
appropriate film. Thus, he could use the films to cue himself as to which
chain of information he needed, and the chain to get the information.
Using this filing system, he completed the one-semester course in two
weeks—and obtained A's on all four exams! He wrote, "The class was a
first of its kind for me, so I was a little leery of how I would perform,"
and he reported (rather surprised) that "the results were quite amazing."
Another student reported that one test containingfivefill-in-theblank questions from four chapters of reading had her thinking that she
had to spend at least 4 hours just acquainting herself with the material.
She reported that, "When time was eaten away to 1 hour I had to make
a last-ditch effort and felt that the only help I had was mnemonics. Using
the Link system, after 1 hour of study I was able to answer five of five
questions correctly, with less recall time than usual."
One student described how she used the Link system to prepare
for an essay test on a text chapter on Roosevelt's New Deal programs.
After learning the Acts and Administrations he created, she grouped

Mental Filing Systems: Link and Story Mnemonics

143

them into three categories of about a half-dozen each and used the Link
system to remember the lists. She reported that there were 10 essay
questions, and using these lists, "I was able to recall the whole chapter
and could effectively answer each question. Results of the test? A!"
Another student used the Link and story systems to remember 20 FCC
rules and regulations regarding radio stations. She took about 45 minutes
to make up substitute words and link them, and remembered all the
rules three days later with no review in between.
The Link system can help in learning foreign languages. Jacques
Romano, who died in 1962 at the age of 98, was noted for his remarkable
memory. He was especially noted for his ability to speak many foreign
languages. Romano found that he needed only about 125 basic words to
communicate in a new language. He could acquire this basic vocabulary
in about two weeks by learning 10 words a day. (This time could probably
be shortened by using the Keyword mnemonic described in chapter 7.)
He then built interlocking chains of new words by linking them to the 125
basic words and increased his vocabulary until he became fluent in the
language.14
Some learning tasks may involve both serial learning and pairedassociate learning, and thus could combine the Link system and the
Keyword mnemonic. For example, being able to give the capital city of
each state when someone tells you the state name, or the vice-president
when someone tells you each president's name, is a paired-associate
task. But how about being able to recall each state name and its capital?
You could use the Link system to link the state names together, and the
Keyword mnemonic to associate the capital to each state.
Of course, these examples of possible uses of the Link and Story
systems do not exhaust all the possibilities. They are given to show that
mnemonic systems really do have practical value, and to suggest ideas
that may stir up your imagination for applications that might better fill
your own needs. In addition, popular memory-training books contain
numerous examples of how to put the mnemonic systems to practical
use; some of the examples in this chapter, as well as in following
chapters, are adapted from these books.15

HAD
Mental Filing Systems:
Loci Mnemonic

O

ne limitation of the Link and Story systems discussed in the
previous chapter stems from the fact that each item is associated
with the previous item so that forgetting one item affects memory for
subsequent items. The Loci system does not have that limitation. In the
Loci system you build up a mental file of previously memorized images
with which you can associate new information to be learned. These
images exist independently of the information to be learned. Thus, the
Loci system fits the analogy of a mental filing system better than does
the Link system.
WHAT IS THE LOCI SYSTEM?
The Loci system is the most ancient mnemonic system, dating back to
about 500 B.C. It was the mnemonic system until about the middle of the
seventeenth century, when other systems, such as the Peg and Phonetic
systems (discussed in the next two chapters), began to evolve. The
history of the Loci system has been traced in detail from 500 B.C.
through the seventeenth century.1 This chapter notes just a few interesting facts about the origin and ancient uses of the Loci system.
144

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

145

Origin
The origin of the Loci system is generally attributed to the following
story told by Cicero. A poet named Simonides was speaking at a banquet
when a message was brought to him that someone was outside waiting
to see him. While Simonides was outside, the roof of the banquet hall
collapsed, crushing the occupants beyond recognition. Simonides was
able to identify the bodies by remembering the places at which the
guests had been sitting. This experience suggested to Simonides a
system for memorizing. Noting that it was his memory of the places
where the guests were sitting that had enabled him to identify them, he
inferred that a person could improve memory by associating mental
images of the items to be remembered with mental images of locations
for the items. This observation reportedly gave rise to the Loci system.
The word loci (pronounced LO si) is the plural of locus, which
means "place or location"; this is also the meaning of the Greek topo.
Thus, the Loci system, which has also been called the "Tbpical" system,
is the system that uses places or locations. The Loci system was used
by Greek and Roman orators to remember long speeches without notes.
Orators visualized objects that represented the topics to be covered in
their speeches, and then mentally placed the objects in different locations—usually parts of a building. They then moved through this building
mentally while delivering the speech, retrieving the object images from
the locations as they came to them. This use of places to remember
speeches may be the origin of the expression, "in the first place," and of
the reference to "topics" in speeches.
How to Use It
The Loci system consists basically of two steps. First, memorize
(overlearn) a series of mental images of familiar locations in some natural
or logical order. This series of locations is your mental filing system,
which you can use over again for different lists of items. This is an
important feature, because the system would hardly be worth the effort
if you had to memorize a new set of locations every time you wanted to
memorize a new fist of items; you would have twice as much to learn
each time. Second, associate a visual image of each item to be remembered with a location in the series; do this by visually placing the items,
in the order they are to be remembered, in the locations as you take an
imaginary walk past the locations. Locations have the advantages of being
concrete (thus easy to visualize) and of being learned in a natural serial
order.

146

YOUR MEMORY

Let us consider an example. Picture in your mind each of the
following locations in a house with which you are very familiar. The first
location is the front walk that leads up to the house. The second location
is the front porch. The third location is the front door. The fourth
location is the coat closet where you hang your coat after entering the
house (or the corner where you throw it). The fifth location is the next
logical place to go—the refrigerator. Picture yourself taking a walk up
the front walk, onto the porch, through the door, to the closet, and then
to the refrigerator. Make sure you see each of these locations in your
mind as clearly as possible while taking your mental walk.
Now suppose you want to use these locations to remember the
samefiveitems we discussed in chapter 9: paper, tire, doctor, rose, and
ball. (As I noted in chapter 9, it may not be worth the effort to learn a
system for only 5 items, but the procedure is the same for 50 items.)
You might proceed as follows: Associate paper with your front walk; you
might see it made of paper (which you can hear crinkling under your feet
as you walk on it), or see your newspaper coming down the walk to meet
you. Associate tire with porch; you might see tires rolling off your porch,
or see your porch made of tires. Associate doctor with door; you might
see a doctor hanging on the doorknob, or stuck in the doorway. Associate
rose with front closet; you might see the closet completely empty except
for a rose bush growing from the shelf, or see a large red rose hanging
from a coat hanger. Finally, associate ball with refrigerator; you might
see your refrigerator in the shape of a giant ball, or hundreds of balls
rolling out of the refrigerator when you open the door.
Now take a mental walk through these five locations and try
retrieving the five items. You will probably find this task to be rather
easy. The Loci system enables you to change afree-recalltask in three
ways to help recall:
1. The task is changed to an aided-recall task because you can use the
locations as aids to cue yourself.
2. The task incorporates paired-associate learning, with the location
serving as the first word in each pair and the item serving as the
second word.
3. The task incorporates serial learning because the locations are
organized in a natural serial order.
It is not difficult to construct several extensive mental files of
locations. In the house you could continue to the living room, to the
bedroom, and then on to each room in your house; then you could go
downstairs, out into the yard, etc. You could increase the number of loci

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

147

in your series by visualizing two or three distinctive locations in each
room (for example, the refrigerator, table, and sink in the kitchen; the
couch, window, and television in the living room; and the bed, dresser,
and clothes closet in the bedroom). Other buildings could also be used,
such as a familiar school building, office building, or store. Nor are you
limited to buildings. You could take a walk through your neighborhood,
or downtown, and construct a file of mental locations. A familiar golf
course has at least 36 ready-made locations (18 tees and 18 greens). You
could also use different parts of your own body, or of your automobile,
for loci.
Other Features
The characteristics of the Loci system have been analyzed in some detail
to explain how and why it works. (Research on how well it works is
discussed later.) In addition to some of the characteristics we have seen
so far,fivemore features are worth noting:2
1. The Loci system is similar in underlying structure and operations to most mnemonic techniques. For example, it is based on the
same principles, and shares essentially the same steps, as other mnemonics like the Keyword mnemonic in chapter 7 and the name-face
mnemonic techniques in chapter 13.
2. In ancient times it was recommended that the locations be
widely spaced. However, it appears to be more important for the loci to
be distinct than it is for them to be distant, at least with respect to how
fast items can be retrieved. College students learned afistof 12 concrete
words using 12 campus buildings as loci. They were then told different
locations, one at a time, and were timed on how long it took to find a
location that was either one, two, or three positions away from the
named location. The search time was not related to the actual physical
distances between the loci, but was related to the number of loci covered.
It took twice as long to find a location two positions away as a location
one position away and three times as long for a location three positions
away. This finding indicates that people do not skip over loci to get
directly to the desired one, but process the intervening loci one at a
time, step by step (the same way you go through your chain of associations using the Link system).
3. The time it takes to retrieve an item of information when given
the location is about the same for abstract items as for concrete items,
but the time to retrieve a location when given the item is slightly longer
for abstract items than for concrete items (in practice, of course, you
will be more concerned with retrieving items when given the locations).

148

YOUR MEMORY

4. It is important to form a good, strong association between each
item and its corresponding location (remember the same emphasis when
associating pairs of items in the Link system). If people learn a series of
locations but are not told how and when to use them, they show no
memory improvement whatsoever. The locations are effective retrieval
cues only if you consciously associate them with the list items when the
items are presented. (Similarly, in remembering paired-associate items,
imagining a context for each pair has been found to help remember them
only if they are pictured as interacting with the context.)3
5. It is not necessary that only one item be associated with each
location. You could associate more than one item with each location if
you picture a grand scene showing interactions among all the items and
the location. The important point is that the several items must be
simultaneously in mind. Thus, for example, you could learn a list of 40
items using only 10 loci by associating 4 items with each location.
However, you may lose the order of the items that are associated with
each location. (A way to overcome this limitation is discussed later in the
chapter.)
I noted at the beginning of this chapter that a disadvantage of the
Link system is that forgetting one item affects memory for the following
items; when a person does not recall a word, it is common that the next
word in the sequence is also missing.4 The Loci system has an advantage
over the Link system in this respect: Forgetting one item does not affect
recall of subsequent items in the Loci system, because the items to be
remembered are associated with an independent series of locations
rather than with each other.
Like the Link system, the Loci system enables you to remember all
the items and to remember them in order. Of course, both systems can
also be used to remember items where the order is not important. One
limitation of both the Link and Loci systems is that they do not enable
you to directly retrieve an item at a particular position on the list. For
example, to find the twelfth item in the Link system you must proceed
through your links until you reach the twelfth item. Likewise, as we saw
earlier in this section, a mental walk through a series of loci is also a
step-by-step process in which the loci are identified one at a time. Thus,
for the Loci system you must walk through your mental locations until
you reach the twelfth location and then retrieve the item from that
location. (Of course, the same limitation applies to any serially ordered
information, even information that we have learned very thoroughly. For
example, can you name the twelfth letter of the alphabet without having
to count through the letters? Most people cannot retrieve a letter directly
in this manner.) An ancient technique to help remember the order of the

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

149

locations will also help alleviate this limitation of the Loci system: Give
some distinguishing mark to, say, every fifth location. For example, you
might always picture a hand (with five fingers) in the fifth location and a
10-doIIar bill in the tenth location. Then, when you want to recall the
twelfth item, you can find the tenth location quickly and have to count
only two more locations from there.

HOW WELL DOES THE LOCI SYSTEM WORK?
In chapter 3 some of the amazing memory feats performed by S, the
Russian newspaper reporter, were described. The following passage
describes one of the methods S used to perform such feats:
When S read through a long series of words, each word would elicit a graphic
image. And since the series was fairly long, he had to find some way of
distributing these images in a mental row or sequence. Most often (and this habit
persisted throughout his life), he would "distribute" them along some roadway
or street he visualized in his mind. . . . Frequently he would take a mental walk
along that street. . . and slowly make his way down, "distributing" his images at
houses, gates, and in store windows. . . . This technique of converting a series
of words into a series of graphic images explains why S could so readily reproduce
a seriesfromstart tofinishor in reverse order; how he could rapidly name the
word that preceded or followed one I'd selected from the series. To do this he
would simply begin his walk, eitherfromthe beginning or end of the street, find
the image of the object I had named and "take a look at" whatever happened to
be situated on either side of it.5
Does that procedure sound familiar? Of course, it is essentially the
Loci system. The Loci system is based on the assumption that memory
for imagined locations will aid memory for items associated with those
locations. Three lines of research relevant to this assumption have been
conducted:
1. Research has found that people can remember the locations of things
they have seen or heard at least as easily as they can remember the
things themselves.
2. Research indicates that memory for locations helps memory for
material and events associated with the. locations. For example,
remembering where we have seen a person helps us recall the
person's name. Even children can use physical locations to aid
memory.
3. Several studies on the Loci system itself have found that it can
significantly improve memory for lists of items.

150

YOUR MEMORY

Considerable research up to the mid-1970s along all three lines
above has been summarized elsewhere.6 Let us look at some recent
research in each of these three areas.
Memory for Locations
Have you ever had the experience of not being able to remember specific
information but being able to remember where you saw it? You might
remember that it was on the left page, in the upper right corner of the
page. You may even remember what part of the book it was in (for
example, toward the end of the book). A similar experience may occur
when we see a person we have met before; we may be able to remember
where we met her without remembering her name. Sometimes when I.
see former students of mine on campus, I can place which classroom
they were in and even where they sat in class before I can recall their
names. These experiences illustrate what is meant by memory for
locations.
There have been several recent research studies on memory for
locations and on using locations to aid memory. Such research is relevant
to the Loci system because the basis of the Loci system lies in
associating events with distinctive imagined locations. Also, good memory for location of pictures on the pages of a book was found to be
positively related to the ability to use the Loci system effectively.7
Research has indicated that locations of objects and of printed
material on a page are remembered automatically. That is, when you are
studying the details of an object you see or the content of material you
read, its location seems to be recorded without conscious effort. Thus,
for example, when people are trying to remember what a speaker said
or something they read, they can remember where the speaker was or
where the reading material was on the page even though they did not try
consciously to record that location during the original learning.8
Research on memory for locations has found some differences
between elderly and young adults. For example, both elderly and young
adults remembered the positions of pictures on a page better than the
corresponding words, but the young adults did better on both kinds of
remembering. Another study also found that elderly people had less
accurate recall of location than younger adults; the young adults remembered urban landmarks and their locations better than the elderly did.
When they were trying to remember the landmarks, young adults
seemed to use a mental walk more to recall buildings, suggesting it may
be more natural for them. This may be a possible weakness in using the
Loci system as opposed to the Link system for the elderly, although it

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

151

has been suggested that they might use the Link system to help them
remember the routes in their mental loci.9
Using Locations to Aid Memory
We have noted the story of how Simonides used the locations of people
to recall the people themselves. Similarly, locations may provide us with
a systematic way of searching memory for people. For example, when
trying to recall the names of my colleagues it helps me to take a mental
walk past their offices and picture each person as I come to his office. I
have used a similar approach to recall the names of all the students in a
particular class; I proceed mentally down each row, picturing and naming
the occupant of each seat. These are examples of using locations to aid
memory.
We saw in chapter 5 that recall can be affected by whether it occurs
in the same context as the original learning; the section on "thinking
around it" in chapter 3 is also relevant to this section. This finding that
physical location can help recall also applies to memory for verbal material
on a page. One study found a positive correlation between how well
people remembered key words from prose and how well they remembered where the words were on the page. In addition, cuing the people
with a word helped them remember its page location, and cuing them
with the page location helped them remember the word.10
Placing words on a pattern on different parts of a page helps you
learn the words better than if they are just listed in a vertical column,
because you can use the locations on the pattern as cues to retrieve the
words. One study found that lists of words (including abstract terms
from a psychology textbook) that were placed on different visual patterns
were recalled better than words placed on the same pattern. Many
learning and note-taking strategies (webbing, networking, mapping, flowcharts, diagrams, etc.) have been developed to make use of this visual
organization or patterning of words and notes on the page. Such spatially
arranged note-taking has been found to work better than regular notetaking for students as young as fourth graders.11
A survey of students at the University of London found that about
half of them had often used such a place-on-a-page method.12 One of my
memory students reported that in her Spanish class she wrote regular
verbs on the left side of the page and irregular verbs on the right. When
taking the test, she was able to remember whether a verb was regular
or irregular by thinking of which side of the page it was on. I used the
same approach to help my son learn a fifth-grade spelling list containing
several words ending in -able or -ible (for example, indomitable and

152

YOUR MEMORY

reversible); we wrote the -able words on the left side of the page and the
-ible words on the right side.
Research using maps also shows the power of location for helping
memory. People learned the names offictitiousprovinces and capitals
better when the names were arranged on a map than when they were
just listed. Other information arranged on maps is also recalled better.
People heard a passage describing events on an imaginary island. As they
listened, some studied a map of the island with features located on it;
some studied a map outline with the features listed next to it; and some
studied an outline without any feature information. People who saw the
map recalled more information from the passage as well as more featurerelated information. In another study, people who created their own
maplike representation while learning a passage remembered more than
those who did not. Suchfindingsshow that a knowledge in visual form of
locations can help us remember a related message.13
Effectiveness of the Loci System
The research discussed sofarshows that we can remember the locations
of things we see and hear, and that we can use these locations to help us
remember the things themselves. Can these twofactorsbe combined to
make the Loci system effective? The research on location and memory
is interesting and useful in itself, but it provides only indirect support for
the Loci system. The Loci system involves using imagined locations
rather than locations that are physically present, and imagining the tobe-remembered items in those locations where the items may never have
been in reality. Recent studies on the Loci system itself provide more
direct support for it.
Several studies have found the Loci system to be effective for
remembering word lists under various conditions, including memory for
abstract nouns as well as concrete nouns. One study found that recall
performance with well-learned loci is equivalent to having the loci physically present. In fact, recall was actually hindered if the loci were visible
during learning but not during recall, which suggests that memorized loci
have an advantage over visible loci that might not be there during recall.
The use of the Loci system is not limited to word lists or lists of separate
items. Freshmen in a college "Study Skills" course were taught to use
the Loci system to remember the main ideas in a prose passage. They
recalled 50 percent more ideas from a 2,200-word passage than did
students who were taught traditional study skills.14
Most research studies on the Loci system—like those on most
other mnemonics—do not give the participants much training, and also
measure their performance on their first attempt to use the system. In

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

153

one study people who were provided with more instruction and more
practice than usual performed substantially better than people who were
merely given the usual instruction.15
Research has also demonstrated that the Loci system can be used
effectively by special populations, such as the elderly (including using the
system to remember a grocery list while purchasing groceries), blind
adults (both elderly and young), and brain-damaged patients.16
HOW CAN YOU USE THE LOCI SYSTEM?
All of the uses of the Link system discussed in chapter 9 are also possible
uses of the Loci system—remembering shopping lists, lists of things to
do, naturally ordered material like the Ten Commandments, lists of
names, speeches, and so on. The only difference is that you associate
each item with a location rather than with the previous item. In addition
to all of the above uses, there are some further uses for the Loci system.
A Mental Filing System
The Loci system can be used literally as a mental filing system. For
example, do you ever think of an idea at a time when it is inconvenient to
write it down? Maybe you think of something you need to do tomorrow,
or of an idea for a speech you are preparing, just as you are falling asleep
at night; but you do not want to get up and turn on the light to hunt for
paper and pencil to write the idea down. Or an idea might come to you
when you are in a movie theater where it is too dark to write, or while
you are driving down the street (your passengers might get a little
nervous if you let go of the steering wheel to write), or in the middle of
doing dishes or mowing the lawn, or in any other situation in which you
cannot immediately write an idea down when it comes to you. The next
morning, or after the movie, or at the next stoplight, or when the dishes
or lawn are done, you have lost the idea. You might remember that you
had an idea, but you cannot remember what it was. One solution to this
problem is to associate the idea to one of your locations as soon as the
idea comes to you. You can retrieve it later and write it down for more
permanent storage if you wish.
Suppose, for example, that you use a series of loci around your
house. You recall as you are drifting off to sleep that you must give your
children lunch money for school tomorrow morning. You might picture
nickels, dimes, and quarters rolling down your front sidewalk. When you
wake up in the morning and remember that there was something you
needed to remember, you can search your loci for it. Or suppose that
while you are sitting in a dark movie theatre you remember that you

154

YOUR MEMORY

need to put a letter out for the mailman when you get home. You might
picture letters cluttering up your front sidewalk. When you get home and
think, "Now what was it I needed to do before I go to bed?" you can
search your loci and recall the task.
If you write things down in a notebook or put things in afilecabinet
for more permanent storage, you must still remember to look at your
notebook orfilecabinet occasionally if they are going to do you any good.
Likewise, using the Loci system as a filing system in which you can
record items for future reference requires that you remember to search
the loci. Often this is not a problem; you can remember that you wanted
to remember something—you just cannot remember what it is. However,
if you cannot even remember that you wanted to remember something,
or if you use the Loci system regularly, then you may want to get into
the habit of having a set time (or times) each day to search your loci. For
example, if you take a few minutes to review your loci before breakfast,
during lunch, and/or just before going to bed, then you will not need to
make a special effort to remember to search your loci.
Using the Same Loci Over and Over
It was noted that the same loci can be used more than once for new lists.
This presents a potential problem in practical uses of the Loci system:
Learning several lists attached to the same loci might lead to unwanted
interference. For example, suppose you have a series of 20 loci and you
want to learn three different lists of 20 items each. If all the items are
associated with the same set of loci, you might have interference as to
which items are on which list
Such interference is the basis of one of the most frequent questions
people ask when I am teaching the Loci system: "If I use the same loci
over to learn new material, won't there be some confusion between the
new and old material?" I answer: "Yes, of course... but there won't be
nearly as much interference as you would get if you tried to memorize
several different sets of material mthout any system." I also point out
that this problem is not as serious in situations where you only want to
remember a list for a short time or where there is enough time (for
example, a day or two) between learning the two lists to allow some
forgetting of the first list, because when you put the new list in the
locations it will weaken the old list.
In addition, there are two ways to reduce such interference. First,
you can construct multiple sets of locations so you do not have to use
the same set many times in close succession. A student could select a
set of loci in one part of campus to use in memorizing material for one

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

155

class and loci in a different part of campus for material for another class.
People could similarly have one set of loci around the house, another
around the office, and another on a familiar neighborhood street. This
way, if you have three lists to learn close together, you could use your
home loci for the first list, your office loci for the second list, and your
neighborhood loci for the third list. You might even use each set of loci
for specific kinds of memory storage; for example, your home loci could
be used to remember things that concern your home and family, your
office loci to remember things connected with work, and your school loci
to remember things connected with school. If you use the Loci system
every day, it might be worth your time to construct seven sets of loci so
that you can use a different set every day.
A second way to reduce interference among several lists learned
with the same loci is "progressive elaboration"—adding each subsequent
word at a particular location to a progressive picture. Reimagine each
earlier item in its location when you associate the new item by elaborating
a grand scene of interacting objects. For example, if your front porch
were the second location in your set of loci, and the second word in each
of three lists were swing, hat, and fish, then the scenes might be: list
one—a swing hanging from your porch; list two—a hat swinging on the
swing on your porch; list three—a fish wearing a hat while swinging on
your porch. Several research studies have found that such progressive
elaboration does help reduce interference among different lists.17
Which of these two methods of reducing interlist interference—
multiple sets of loci and progressive elaboration—is preferable? The
answer depends on the person who is using them, but I recommend that
the person who may makefrequentuse of the Loci system learn several
different sets of loci and use the multiple-sets method. The benefits of
having several sets of loci are probably worth the effort it takes to learn
them.
Other Uses
You may recognize that the method of progressive elaboration is sort of
a combination of the Loci system and the Story or Link system. The loci
are used to start each story or link, and a story or link serves to retrieve
the items in order at each location. Notice that the item order would be
lost if the items at each location were just pictured in a single photographic image rather than ordered sequentially using the Link or Story
system.
There is another way in which the Loci system can be combined
with the Link or Story system. A set of 10 loci could be used to

156

YOUR MEMORY

remember 100 items. Place the first item in the first location; then use
the Link or Story system to associate the next nine items in order; then
place the eleventh item in the second location and link the next nine
items onto it; and so on, until you place the ninety-first item in the tenth
location and link items 92 to 100 onto it. In recall, you then use your loci
to cue you for the first item in each group of 10, and your inter-item
associations (links) to recall the next 9. You can thus recall 100 items
with no single chain of associations longer than 10 items.
The students in my memory course have tried this combining of the
Link and Loci systems to remember a list of 40 words. The words were
read to the students once, with a 5- to 10-second pause after each word.
Students used 10 loci with four words linked at each one. The following
are the results for a little more than 100 students: About one-third of
the students (34 percent) got a perfect recall score of 40, and about onehalf of the students (52 percent) recalled at least 39 of the 40 words; at
the other end of the performance scale, only 2 percent of the students
recalled fewer than 26 words.
The experience of one person who used 40 loci to memorize a 40digit number may suggest additional ways in which you could use the
Loci sysem (although a more efficient way to learn numbers is described
in chapter 12). He associated something representing each number with
each location. For example, to associate the digit "1" with the location
"ice cream store," he used, "I am rather a fat little boy so I can have
only 1 ice cream cone"; to associate "6" with "fire station," he used,
"They tell me there is a 6-alarm fire. It must be very unusually exciting,
for I had never heard of as many as 6 alarms for a fire before"; to
associate "2" with "the market," he used, "I have been sent to the
market to get 2 bags of potatoes."18
I often give my memory students a homework assignment to apply
the mnemonic systems to something they want to learn. The variety of
possible uses of the Loci system is illustrated by the following examples
of a few of the things students have learned with the system in response
to this assignment: errands, 11 wedding preparation items, 11 old-car
models and years, 10 company names in a stock portfolio, the Bill of
Rights, 8 major Jewish holidays, 30 psychoactive drugs, 16 main components of cerebrospinal fluid, and the countries of Westen Europe.
As with the Link system, these uses of the Loci system do not
exhaust all the possibilities. They are intended to suggest the different
kinds of possible applications of the system. You might adapt some of
these suggestions to your own needs, or even be stimulated to think up
some additional uses for the Loci system.

Mental Filing Systems
Peg Mnemonic

A

s was noted in chapter 10, direct retrieval of an item at a certain
position in a memorized list (for example, the twelfth item) is
difficult for both the Link and Loci systems. They are both dependent on
sequential retrieval. The Loci system associates items to be learned with
prememorized information, lb use the same approach in such a way that
you can retrieve an item directly, you might associate items to other
information that you already have memorized and know very well: the
number sequence. If you could associate the first item with number 1,
the second item with number 2, and so on, then for recall you could just
recall what item was associated with each number. If you wanted to
retrieve the twelfth item directly, you would just think of number 12 and
see what item was associated with it. The main problem with this
strategy is that numbers are abstract and thus are hard to associate with
items. But the strategy would be feasible if a way could be found to make
the numbers concrete, or to substitute something concrete for the
numbers. This is what the Beg system does.

WHAT IS THE PEG SYSTEM?
The Beg system is a mental filing system consisting of a series of
prememorized concrete nouns. The concrete nouns are not arbitrarily
157

YOUR MEMORY

158

selected; rather, they are selected in such a way as to correspond
meaningfully with numbers.
Origin
The Peg system can be traced to the mid-1600s, when Henry Herdson
developed an extension of the Loci system. Herdson dispensed with the
spatial locations of the objects and merely used the objects themselves.
Each digit was represented by any one of several objects that resemble
the numbers (for example, 1 = candle, 3 = trident, 8 = spectacles,
0 = orange).
A system that used rhyming syllables and words to represent the
numbers was introduced in England around 1879 by John Sambrook.1
The nouns rhyme with the numbers they represent so that it is easy to
remember what noun represents each number. The following is a widely
used version of the Peg system based on rhymes, indicating the word
that represents each number:
one-bun
two-shoe
three-tree
four-door
five-hive

six-sticks
seven-heaven
eight-gate
nine-wine
ten-hen

How to Use It
Most people can learn these rhyming pegwords with little effort. In fact,
many people already know half of them from the nursery rhyme, "Onetwo buckle my shoe, three-four shut the d o o r . . . " Each of the pegword
objects should be pictured as vividly as possible. The bun should be a
specific kind of bun, such as a breakfast bun, a dinner roll, or a hamburger
bun. The shoe could be a man's dress shoe, a woman's high-heeled shoe,
a gym shoe, or a boot. The tree could be a pine tree in the forest, a
Christmas tree, or a palm tree.
The Peg system gets its name from the fact that the pegwords
serve as mental pegs or hooks on which the person "hangs" the items to
be remembered. l b use the Peg system to learn new material, you
associate the new material with each of the pegwords in order. For
example, the first five pegwords could be used to learn the list we have
used in the last two chaters—paper, tire, doctor, rose, ball—as follows:
Associate paper with bun; see yourself eating a bun made of paper, or
reading the evening news-bun. Associate tire with shoe; see yourself
wearing tires on your feet, or see a car that has four shoes in the place

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

159

of tires. Associate doctor with tree; see a doctor operating on a tree, or
a doctor climbing a tree. Associate rose with door, see a rose in the place
of the doorknob, or a rosebush growing from the middle of the door.
Associate ball with hive; see a round beehive in the shape of a ball, or
balls rather than beesflyingout of the hive. Of course, all the considerations involving effective visual associations that were discussed in chapter
7 are relevant in making these associations.
To recall the items in order, you recall the pegwords and retrieve
the items associated with them. Recall of items out of order proceeds in
the same manner. For example, what was the fourth item? Think of
"door" and retrieve the item associated with it. What was the third item?
Retrieve the item associated with "tree."
Other Pegs
The rhyming Beg system that was just described is one that is commonly
used and the one on which most research has been done; however, there
are actually a number of Peg systems. They all have in common the
characteristic of using a concrete object to represent each number, but
there are various ways to choose the object that represents each
number. The system discussed to this point uses pegwords that rhyme
with the numbers. Other rhymes have also been used: one-gun, twoglue, three-bee, four-core,five-knives,six-picks, seven-oven, eightplate, nine-line, ten-pen. Pegwords that represent objects that look like
the numbers can also be selected: 1 = pencil, 2 = swan (the curve of
the neck resembling the digit 2), 8 = hourglass, 10 = knife and plate.
Pegwords can be selected on the basis of meaning also; one-me (there is
only one me), three-pitchfork (three prongs),five-hand(five fingers),
nine-baseball (nine players on a team). Peg systems often do not include
a pegword for 0 (zero), but on the basis of rhyme you could use "Nero,"
on the basis of look-alikes you could use "donut," and on the basis of
meaning you could use an empty "box."
One limitation of the Peg system is that it is difficult to find good
pegwords to represent numbers beyond 10. It is hard tofindwords, for
example, that rhyme with (or look like) the numbers 24 or 37. However,
it is possible tofindrhyming words for the numbers from 11 to 20. Most
of them are verbs representing an action that can be visualized. The
following are some examples: eleven-leaven, or a football eleven; twelveshelve, or elf; tJiirteen-thirsting, or hurting; fourteen-fording, or courting;fifteen-fitting,or lifting; sixteen-Sistine, or licking; seventeen-leavening, or deafening; eighteen-aiding, or waiting; nineteen-knighting, or
pining; twenty-plenty, or penny.

160

YOUR MEMORY

Another possible approach to generate pegwords for the numbers
from 11 to 20 is to use rhyming pegwords for 1 to 10, and then to use
pegwords based on look-alikes or meaning to represent the second digit
of each number from 11 to 20 (for example, 11 = pencil, 12 — swan,
13 = pitchfork, etc.). Also, some people have tried using the rhyming
pegword for each digit of a two-digit number (for example, 11 = bunbun, 12 = bun-shoe, 13 = bun-tree), but this approach can cause some
interference due to many similar visual images.
Alphabet Pegs
It was suggested at the beginning of this chapter that numbers would
make a good series of pegs if they were not so abstract because they
are naturally ordered and you know them very well. There is another
possible source of pegs that also consists of information that is naturally
ordered and that you know very well—the alphabet. The alphabet
provides a ready-made series of 26 prememorized pegs. However, the
letters have somewhat the same problem that numbers have: They are
not very concrete and meaningful. If we could make them concrete, then
we could use the alphabet as a Peg system. One way to do this is to
associate a concrete word with each letter in such a way that the words
are easy to learn.
Each of the following alphabet pegwords either rhymes with the
letter of the alphabet it represents or has the letter as the initial sound
of the word. The few words that are not concrete objects can be
visualized by using substitute objects (for example, effort—a person
working; age—an old person).
A-hay
B-bee
C-sea
D-deed
E-eve
F-effort
G-jeep
H-age
I-eye
J-jay
K-key
L-el
M-hem

N-hen
O-hoe
P-pea
Q-cue
R-oar
S-ass
T-tea
U-ewe
V-veal
W-double you
X-ax
Y-wire
Z-zebra

A second alphabet Peg system could be compiled from concrete
words that begin with each letter of the alphabet but dp not rhyme:

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

A-ape
B-boy
C-cat
D-dog
E-egg
F-fig
G-goat
H-hat
I-ice
J-jack
K-kite
L-log
M-man

161

N-nut
O-owl
P-pig
Q-quilt
R-rock
S-sock
T-tqy
U-umbrella
V-vane
W-wig
X-X ray
Y-yak
Z-zoo

Alphabet pegwords can be used in exactly the same way as number
pegwords. The only difference is that if you do not know the numerical
positions of the letters (which most people do not), the alphabet pegwords are not amenable to direct retrieval of an item at a given numbered
position. The alphabet pegwords could also be used in other ways. For
example, if you want to learn the alphabet backward, you could link the
words from zebra to hay or zoo to ape.
Peg and Loci Compared
There are a number of similarities between the Peg system and the Loci
system, and performance of the two systems has been found to be
equivalent.2 The following are four similarities:
1. In both the Peg system and the Loci system items to be learned
are associated with previously memorized concrete items. These previously memorized items make up the mental filing system to which new
items are attached. The pegwords are used in exactly the same way as
the locations are used in the Loci system. As with the locations in the
Loci system, the pegwords can be used over again to learn new items.
Recall is also similar for both systems; you proceed through your
locations or pegwords and retrieve the items associated with them.
2. In the Bag system the mental filing system consists of a series
of concrete objects rather than of locations, but locations are merely
objects that are spatially ordered. For example, the five loci used in the
example in the previous chapter are a sidewalk, a porch, a door, a closet,
and a refrigerator.
3. As with the Loci system, the Peg system changes a free-recall
task to aided recall via a paired-associate task, with the pegwords serving
as the first word in each pair. Thus, the Peg system and the Loci system

162

YOUR MEMORY

are essentially the same as paired-associate learning, except that the
learner generates his own cue words rather than having them given to
him by someone else.
4. The Peg system and the Loci system have several advantages
over free recall. First, you have a definite and consistent learning
strategy; you know exactly what to do with each item as you study it
(that is, associate it with a location or pegword). Second, you have
definite pigeonholes (pegwords or locations) into which the items can be
filed. Third, you have a systematic retrieval plan telling you where to
begin recall, how to proceed systematically from one item to the next,
and how to monitor the adequacy of recall. (You can tell how many items
you have forgotten, and which ones.) Thus, both systems overcome one
of the major problems in free recall—how to remind yourself of all the
things you are supposed to recall.
Although the Peg and Loci systems are similar, they have at least
three significant differences. First, as has been noted, the Peg system
has the advantage of permitting direct retrieval. If you want to know
what the eighth item is without going through the first seven, you merely
think of "gate" and see what is associated with it. Second, the Loci
system has the advantage of allowing a large number of mental images
to make up the mental filing system: There is really no limit to the
number of locations you can use, but it is difficult to find a large number
of pegwords that rhyme with or look like the numbers greater than 10
and especially greater than 20. A third possible difference is suggested
by comments of some of my memory students: The Loci system may be
a little easier to learn and use. Some of my students who have used both
systems report that the Loci system seems a little more natural (at least
at first) because it uses knowledge that they already have, rather than
requiring them to learn a new set of arbitrary associations between
pegwords and numbers, and then make up images for the pegwords.
HOW WELL DOES THE PEG SYSTEM WORK?
Some psychologists described an interesting experience in teaching the
Peg system to a skeptical friend. They told him the pegwords and told
him how to use them. Then, despite his protestations that it would never
work because he was too tired, they gave him a list of 10 words to learn.
The words were read one at a time, and after reading the word, we waited until
he announced that he had the association. It took about five seconds on the
average to form the connection. After the seventh word he said that he was sure
thefirstsix were already forgotten. But we persevered.

Mental Filing Systems:LociMnemonic

163

After one trial through the list we waited a minute or two so that he could
collect himself and ask any questions that came to mind. Then we said, "What is
number eight?"
He stared blankly, and then a smile crossed hisface,"I'll be dammed," he
said, "It's a lamp."
"And what number is a cigarette?"
He laughed outright now, and then gave the correct answer.
"And there is no strain," he said, "absolutely no sweat."
They then proceeded to demonstrate, to his amazement, that he could in
fact name every word correctly.3
Research Evidence
It was noted in the previous section that the Peg system is similar to
paired-associate learning, except that the learners provide their own
pegwords rather than having them given to them by someone else. This
means that the research that shows the effectiveness of visual imagery
in paired-associate learning also suggests the effectiveness of the Beg
system. As we learned in chapter 4, there are numerous studies showing
that visual imagery aids learning and memory in paired-associate learning.
Several research studies were done on the Peg system from the
mid-1960s to the 1970s. The findings from those studies, which mostly
used word lists, include the following: College students typically recall
about 7 of 10 words without the Peg system, and 9 or more with the Peg
system; people have been able to use the Peg system effectively on lists
of up to 40 words; the Peg system is effective at a presentation rate of 4
to 5 seconds per word or at a slower rate, but not at a rate as fast as 2
seconds per word; people can effectively learn up to six consecutive lists
of 10 words with the same pegwords; alphabet pegwords as well as
numerical pegwords are effective; concrete words are learned better
than abstract words, but abstract words can also be learned using
substitute words; results are mixed on how well abstract pegwords work,
so it is probably best to use concrete pegwords.4
Since the mid-1970s, several additional studies have supported the
earlier research in showing the Peg system to be effective in learning
lists of words under various conditions. However, in one study people
used the pegwords to memorize either random nouns or nouns from a
categorized list. The pegwords worked better with the random nouns
than with the categorized nouns because the categories seemed to
interfere with the use of the pegwords. This finding suggests that you
may not want to use the Peg system when there is some meaningful way
to group the items to use organization.5

164

YOUR MEMORY

The above studies were done on college students. A recent study
had junior high school students, half of whom were learning disabled,
learn the Peg system and then use it to learn four 10-word lists. The
students who used the Peg system recalled more than twice as many
words as the students who were not taught the Peg system, immediately
after learning as well as one week and evenfivemonths later.6
Ail of the research described so far shows that the Peg system can
be effective in remembering word lists, but what about remembering
more complex material such as concepts or ideas? One study found that
the Peg system not only can help remembrance better but can even help
in forming concepts in a task requiring high memory demands. Also, in
several studies people used the Peg system to remember ideas in the
form of sayings. Some of the sayings were concrete (for example, "Don't
rock the boat") and others were abstract (for example, "History repeats
itself"). College students using the Peg system remembered more
sayings from lists of 10 to 15 sayings than did students not using the
system. They also reported that it took less effort to remember the
sayings than students not using the pegwords reported. Children in the
fourth grade and middle-aged and elderly adults also remembered more
sayings using the Peg system.7
In addition to these research studies on memory for sayings, I have
also tested the students in my memory classes with the sayings. I have
them try to remember a list of 10 numbered sayings in correct numerical
order at the beginning of the semester, and again later using the Peg
system. The following are the results for nearly 200 students in several
classes: The percentage of students with perfect recall of all 10 sayings
doubled when the Peg system was used (from 20 percent to 40 percent);
the percentage recalling at least 9 of 10 sayings increased even more
dramatically—from 28 percent to 62 percent. At the other end of the
performance scale, the percentage of students recalling five or fewer
sayings decreased from 22 percent to 2 percent.
I have also taught the Peg system as part of a short memory course
for elderly adults. One class consisted of 28 students between the ages
of sixty-two and seventy-nine. Before learning the Peg system, they
recalled an average of 5.2 of 10 sayings; their average increased to 7.9
when they used the Peg system. The percentage of students recalling at
least 9 of 10 sayings increased from 11 percent without using the Peg
system to 50 percent when using the system. The students in their
seventies performed just as well as the students in their sixties. Most
students also rated the Peg system as the most interesting and worthwhile part of the course.8

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

165

Schoolwork
We have seen that the Peg system can be used effectively on word lists
and even on more complex material. Can it help in learning the kinds of
material students must learn in school? A recent book on study skills
gave a negative answer to this question. It stated that the Peg system
"has two important limitations with regard to schoolwork. First, it can
be used with only one list of items for only one exam at a time. Second,
no permanent knowledge is gained, for items so memorized are quickly
forgotten."9 Let us look at a few recent research studies that have
investigated the effectiveness of pegwords in the classroom.
The Peg system was used to teach the hardness levels of minerals
to learning-disabled high school students and to junior high school
students. They first learned a substitute word for each mineral, and then
saw an interacting picture associating the substitute word with the
appropriate pegword (for example, pyrite is hardness level six so the
picture showed a pie being supported by sticks). Students also learned
the colors and uses of the minerals. They also learned the reasons for
extinction of prehistoric reptiles in order of plausibility. For all these
tasks, the Psg system was more effective than traditional instruction.10
Eighth-grade students used the Peg and Loci systems to learn the
names of the U.S. presidents. They used the pegwords for the numbers
from 1 to 10. Seasonal loci represented decades of numbers; 1-10 was a
spring garden scene, 11-20 a summer beach scene, 21-30 a fall football
scene; and 31-40 a winter snow scene. Presidents' names were represented by substitute words, and the associations were presented in
pictures. Two sample associations are: Tyler (tie)-10 (hen)-garden, and
Garfield (guard)-20 (hen)-beach. The students also learned biographical
information on the presidents. This combined Keyword-Loci-Peg system
has been expanded for extreme cases to learn up to 260 items, using
alphabet scenes from an airplane scene to a zoo scene (10 pegwords x
26 alphabet loci = 260 items of ordered information).11
Sixth-grade students who were trained over several days in the use
of the Peg system used it to learn a list of names and recipe ingredients.
In another study, learning-disabled students in the sixth to eighth grades
used the Keyword mnemonic (substitute words) and the Peg system to
learn information on dinosaurs. In both studies, students who used the
Peg system remembered the information better than those who did not
use it.12
Other studies show that the Peg system can also be used to
remember how to do something. College students and high school
students were taught 10 steps to prepare a daisy wheel printer for

166

YOUR MEMORY

operation. (For example, step 1—open clamps on side of printer; step
2—put end of paper over the sprockets; step 6—set dip switch to
"feed"; and step 10—push self-test switch.) For both age groups,
students who used the Peg system spent less time learning the steps,
remembered more steps in order, and followed more steps correctly in
actually preparing the printer (whether the steps were presented orally
or in writing).13
We have seen that the Peg system can be used by special populations, such as young children, learning-disabled children, and elderly
adults. In addition, the Peg system has been profitably used by an
amnesiac patient to help remember things to do after getting up in the
morning, and has been incorporated in a training program for rehabilitating memories of people with brain damage.14
HOW CAN YOU USE THE PEG SYSTEM?
The Peg system can be used for any of the uses suggested for the Link
and Loci systems, including learning lists, naturally ordered material,
names, and speeches, or as a mental filing system for temporary storage
when it is inconvenient to write something down, or as a mental filing
system for more permanent storage on a regular day-to-day basis.
Remembering Ideas
The Peg system can also be used for tasks for which direct access is
desirable. For example, I used the Peg system to teach the Ten Commandments to my two daughters (who had just turned five and seven
years old) so that they could recall them out of order as well as in order.
The first step was to teach them the Peg system. Both girls were able
to recall all the pegwords after two times through the list. The second
step was to teach them how to use the pegwords. I gave them a list of
10 items to memorize and coached them in forming visual associations
between the pegwords and the items. Both girls recalled all 10 items
after the list was presented, and recalled 9 of the 10 items the following
day. They were given additional practice with a second list of 10 items,
and again recalled all 10 items on immediate recall. When tested the next
day, they each needed prodding—"What is the pegword?" and "What is
(pegword) doing?"—on two items.
Thefinalstep was to use the pegwords to learn the Ten Commandments. A concrete item representing each commandment was associated
using visual imagery with the corresponding pegword. For example, an
image of the girls' parents holding a beehive (five-hive) represented the

Mental Filing Systems: Loci Mnemonic

167

Fifth Commandment ("Honor thy father and thy mother") and a thief
stealing a gate (eight-gate) represented the Eighth Commandment
("Thou shalt not steal".) Both girls learned all 10 of the commandments
in order and out of order, and were even able to recall them in a surprise
test two months later. Not only was the system effective but it was fun
for the girls, and they were anxious to apply it to learning new things.15
A few years later I tried the same experiment with my son when he
was still four years old, and recently I tried it with my youngest daughter
when she was still three years old (about a month before her fourth
birthday). Of course, it took a little more practice, but the four- and
three-year-olds were also able to use the Beg system for this task. I did
not ask the three-year-old to practice using the pegwords on word lists,
and also did not require her to learn the exact words of some of the Ten
Commandments, but only the ideas. (For example, instead of "Thou
shalt not bear false witness" she learned, "Don't lie.")
Nine months later I quizzed my four-year-old daughter on her
memory of the pegwords. There had been no review, or even mention,
of either the pegwords or the Ten Commandments during that time. I
started by asking her if she could remember that a long time ago she
learned some rhyming words that sound like the numbers from 1 to 10.
Her first response was, "Huh? I don't know what you're talking about."
Then, after a few seconds, "Oh, yeah, now I remember—six-sticks." I
said, "That's right! Now I want you to say as many of the rhyming words
as you can remember. Say each number first, then the rhyming word
thatgoeswith.it."
She recalled 7 of the 10 pegwords correctly, drawing a blank for
numbers 3 and 9, and recalling "den" (rather than "hen") for 10. I then
made the questions multiple-choice for those three numbers, telling her
four words that rhymed with each number. She correctly recognized the
pegwords for 3 and 9, but still chose "den" for 10.
About a week later I tested her memory for the Ten Commandments. She . was not able to remember any of them without prompting,
but remembered four of them when I described the associations we had
used. After one review she was able to recall all 10 of the commandments
without prompting, and did it again three days later with no further
review.
The significance of this discussion on the Ten Commandments does
not lie in knowing the commandments as much as it does in showing how
the Beg system can be used to learn ideas, most of which are rather
abstract. A student in my memory class related an experience which
shows that the Beg system can help with this kind of task even when the
user does not believe it will work. After teaching his wife the Ten

168

YOUR MEMORY

Commandments using the procedure described above, the student reported, "She was amazed that they could be learned so easily. Previous
to this experiment she had told me that she couldn't do it. She also had
mentioned that it seemed like more work [having to memorize pegwords], but she doesn't feel that way now."
Remembering Numbers
A use of the Peg system that goes beyond the Loci system is for learning
numbers. (The Phonetic system in the next chapter is even more efficient
for learning numbers). You can remember a long number by linking the
pegwords together. For example, the 10-digit number 1639420574 could
be remembered by using the Link system to remember bun-sticks-treewine, and so on. Your capacity for a string of numbers can be extended
far beyond the short-term memory span of about seven digits, which was
discussed in chapter 2 (as long as the digits are presented slowly enough
for you to make associations).
The Peg system could be used to remember the 12-digit number
representing a calendar year (see chapter 7); the number for 1988 (376315-374-264) could be remembered by linking tree-heaven-sticks-tree,
and so on. This method has a disadvantage of requiring sequential
retrieval (to remember the digit for September, for example, you must
remember that September is the ninth month, and then run through the
number until you reach the ninth digit). A more efficient method would
be to make up a substitute word for each month, based either on rhyme
or meaning (for example, January = jam, February = valentine, April
= ape, September = scepter). Then associate the pegword for each
digit with the pegword for the corresponding month as paired associates
(jam-tree, valentine-heaven, ape-tree, scepter-door). Now to find the
key digit for September you do not have to run through the number
sequentially until you reach the ninth digit; you can directly recall
September-scepter-door-four.
The Peg system can be used to count things in any kind of a
repetitious task in which you may lose count of how many times you have
done it. For example, I use the pegwords to count laps around the track
when I jog. One track where I run is an indoor track that is one-fifth of a
mile around. This means that to run two miles, for example, I must circle
the track 10 times. After running for a while, it is easy to lose track (pun
intended) of how many laps I have completed. To help me overcome this
problem, I picture myself jumping over a bun as I complete myfirstlap,
jumping over a shoe as I complete lap two, running into a tree at the end
of lap three, and so on. Another day I might picture the appropriate item

Mental Filing Systems:PhoneticMnemonic

169

sitting off to the side of the track as I complete each lap, or picture each
item damaged in some way (squashed bun, broken shoe, sawed tree,
etc.), or picture each item on fire. Varying the images from day to day
helps reduce interference from the previous day so that I can tell that I
am counting today's laps rather than yesterday's laps. Of course, the
procedure could be adapted to count repetitions in any kind of a routine
task; one of my memory students used this procedure to keep track of
swimming laps and another one kept track of repetitions in practicing
piano exercises.
Using the Same Pegwords Over and Over
A question was raised in chapter 10 regarding possible interference from
using the same loci to learn several different lists. This issue is also
relevant to using the same pegwords for several lists. Research evidence
shows that there will be some interference, but not as much as when
you do not use any system. For example, in one study some people used
the Peg system to learn six consecutive lists of 10 items each, and other
people learned the lists without the Peg system. The average recall of all
six lists for the people using the Peg system was 63 percent; it was 22
percent for the other people. In addition, people using the Peg system
recalled words equally well from all six lists, whereas the others recalled
most of their wordsfromthe last two lists presented.16
Chapter 10 discussed two possible ways of reducing interference
among different lists that are learned in close succession with the Loci
system. First, you can construct several different sets of loci so you will
not have to use the same ones as often. Second, you can use progressive
elaboration. These two methods can also help reduce interference that
may come from using the Peg system on several successive lists. You
could either construct several sets of pegwords (perhaps one based on
rhymes, one on look-alikes, one on meaning, and one on the alphabet),
or you could attach more than one item to each pegword by using
progressive elaboration. (One study on progressive elaboration that was
cited in chapter 10 found equivalent results for the Loci and Peg
systems.)17
Other Uses
As with the Link and Loci systems, the Peg system can also be used in
school settings. We have seen some research on the use of the Peg
system by students in school. Experiences reported by some of my
memory students suggest additional ideas for possible applications of the

170

YOUR MEMORY

Peg system. One student took an exam on logarithms in a precalculus
math class and reported that he "emerged dazed, confused, and with a
score of 73 percent. " The exam consisted of 11 types of problems, and
each could be solved easily if the key manipulation could be remembered.
The student used the pegwords to learn these key theorems and retook
the exam. He reported, "There wasn't any problem or perplexity in
retaking the exam, and I emerged this time with a 92 percent."
Another student used the Peg system to prepare for an open-book
test on the content of about 50 Bible scriptures that had been marked in
class. She linked all the scriptures in each chapter together, and then
used pegwords for chapter numbers and associated them with the first
scripture in each link of associations. She then linked the chapter
pegwords together to remember which chapters had scriptures marked.
She got 98 percent on the test and reported: "The test was timed and
the majority of the class did not finish in the time limit. I had no difficulty
finishing; in fact, I even had time to look over the test to make sure I did
not want to change any of my answers."
One student used the Peg and Loci systems to help remember the
numerical designations for the nine components in the radio compass
system. She was attending a technical school in which students had to
learn many different navigational systems. Each system has several
components and each component has a number of designations. The Peg
system helped her remember the numbers, and the Loci helped her
remember which components go with which systems.
Another student was employed in training mentally and emotionally
handicapped people to do custodial work, to prepare them for job
placement. One custodial job they learned to do was cleaning lavatories,
which involved 14 steps. My student first used the Peg system to learn
the steps himself so that he could teach them more effectively; he then
used the peg system to help his trainees learn the steps. He reported
that developmentally disabled and emotionally handicapped trainees were
successful in memorizing the steps, and that their quality rate according
to competitive standards increased from approximately 20 percent to
more than 80 percent of competitive norms.
Other examples of uses of the Peg system reported by my memory
students include learning such varied materials as 6 trigonometry functions, 13 principles of motivation, campus building names, 18 kinds and
symptoms of shock, 12 food groups for a diet, 10 short stories and
authors, the numbers from 1 to 10 in Japanese, 10 points to remember
for a dental-school interview, 11 periods of history in evolution, 20 most
important events in U.S. history, and 8 aids in horseback riding. Another
application for the Peg system had been developed in the military to

Mental Filing Systems:PhoneticMnemonic

171

teach new recruits the 11 "orders to sentries" comprising the duties that
a sentry must be able to recall by number.18
Like the Loci system, the Peg system can be combined with the
Link system to remember as many as 100 items. Associate thefirstitem
with "bun" and link the next nine items; associate the eleventh item with
"shoe" and link the next nine items, and so on. Using this approach, you
do not have any link longer than 10 words, and you use the pegwords to
cue you for thefirstword in each link.
You could use the pegwords as a mental filing system for keeping
track of daily appointments. For example, if you need to go to the dentist
today at 10:00 and take your car in for an oil change at 3:00, you could
associate "dentist-hen" and "oil-tree." If you made up a substitute word
for each day of the week (for example, Monday = money, Wednesday
= windy), you could construct a mental filing system for keeping track
of weekly appointments. Thus, if you need to go to the dentist next
Monday at 10:00 and take your car in for an oil change on Wednesday at
3:00, you could associate "dentist-money-hen" and "oil-windy-tree."
Additional practical applications of the Peg system can be found in
popular memory-training books, such as those referenced at the end of
chapter 9.

Mental Filing Systems:
Phonetic Mnemonic

T

he Phonetic system is the most sophisticated and most versatile of
the mnemonic systems discussed in this book. It is also the most
complex and thus requires the most study and effort to master. However,
for use as a mental filing system, the Phonetic system overcomes a
limitation of the Peg system by allowing construction of more than 10 to
20 pegwords. At the same time it retains the Peg system's advantage of
direct retrieval. In addition, the Phonetic system enables us to remember
numbers better by making them meaningful.
WHAT IS THE PHONETIC SYSTEM?

The system discussed in this chapter has been referred to by such terms

asfigure-alphabet,digit-letter, number-alphabet, hook, number-consonant,
and number-to-sound. Of these many terms, the most descriptive is the

last one, the number-to-sound system. The other labels are more
descriptive of older versions of the system. The reason why I have
chosen to call the system the "Phonetic system" will become clear as it
is described.
172

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic

Mnemonic

173

In the Phonetic system each of the digits from 0 to 9 is represented
by a consonant sound; these consonant sounds are then combined with
vowels to code numbers into words, which are more meaningful and thus
easier to remember than numbers.
Origin
The origin of the Phonetic system has been traced back more than 300
years to 1648, when Winckelman (also spelled Wenusheim or Wennsshein
in some sources) introduced a digit-letter system in which the digits
were represented by letters of the alphabet. These letters were then
used to form words to represent a given number sequence. Richard
Grey published a refinement of Winckelman's digit-letter system in
1730.1
In these early systems the digits were represented by both consonants and vowels, and the letters representing each digit were selected
arbitrarily. In 1813, Gregor von Feinaigle described a further refinement
of the system. In his system the digits were represented by consonants
only; vowels had no numerical value. In addition, the consonants representing each digit were not selected arbitrarily; rather, they were
selected on the basis of their similarity to, or association with, the digits
they represented (for example, "t" = 1 because it resembles the digit
1, "n" = 2 because it has two downstrokes; "d" = 6 because it
resembles a reversed 6). Words were then formed to represent numbers
by inserting vowels; thus 6 could be represented by aid, and 16 could be
represented by tide.2
Further modifications of the digit-consonant system were made by
mnemonists during the 1800s. In 1844, Francis Fauvel-Gouraud published
an attempted classification of all the words in the English language that
could represent numbers up to 10,000. By the end of the nineteenth
century the digit-consonant system had evolved into its present form.
During the 1890s it was briefly described in William James's classic
psychology textbook, and more thoroughly described by Loisette as the
system of "analytic substitutions." The digits were represented not by
consonants themselves but by consonant sounds. This version of the
system has remained essentially unchanged in memory books and commercial courses during the twentieth century.3
Description
The following display summarizes the digit-sound equivalents that are
the basis of the Phonetic system:

174

YOUR MEMORY

Digit Consonant Sound

Memory Aid

1

t, th, d

"t" has one downstroke

2

n

two downstrokes

3

m

three downstrokes

4

r

last sound for the word four in several
languages

5

1

Roman numeral for 50 is "L"

6

j, sh, ch, soft g

reversed script "j" resembles 6(1.)

7

k, q, hard c, hard g

"k" made of two 7's (X)

8

f, v

script "f" resembles 8 ( I )

9

p, b

"p" is mirror image of 9

0

z, s, soft c

"z" for "zero"

There are several advantages to the way the consonant sounds have
been selected to represent the digits in the display above:
1. The digit-sound equivalents are not too hard to learn (see the
memory aids in the display).
2. The sounds are mutually exclusive: Each digit is represented by only
one sound or family of similar sounds.
3. The sounds are exhaustive: All the consonant sounds in the English
language are included, except for "w," "h," and "y," which you can
easily remember by the word why (the letter h has value only as it
changes the sounds of other consonants—th, ch, ph, sh).
All of the digits except 2, 3, 4, and 5 are actually represented by
of similar sounds rather than by a single sound. The memory
aids in the display above can help in remembering the primary letter (the
one listed first) for each digit. Here are some phrases and sentences
(acrostics) that can help in remembering all of the sounds that go
together in each family: for 1—train the dog; for 6—Jack should chase
giants; for 7—kings and cjueens count gold; for 8—fun"vacation; for 9—
pretty baby; for 0—zero is a cipher.
It is important to realize that in the Phonetic system it is the
consonant sounds that are important, not the letters themselves. This is
why I have chosen to call it the Phonetic system. To understand why
certain sounds are grouped together, say the following words aloud and
pay close attention to how similarly the underlined sounds in each group

families

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic

Mnemonic

175

are formed with your mouth and tongue: for 1—toe, though, doe; for
6—jaw, show, chow, gem; for 7—key, guo, cow, go; for 8—foe, vow;
for 9—pay, bay; for 0—zero, sue, cell. Actually, there are only three
sounds for 6 because "soft g" is the same as "j," two sounds for 7
because "hard c" and "q" are the same as "k," and two sounds for 0
because "soft c" is the same as "s."
The emphasis on sounds is important because different letters or
letter combinations can take on the same sounds. For example, the "sh"
sound can be made by the letters s (sugar), c (ocean), ci (gracious), and
ti (ratio). Not only can different letters take on the same sound, but the
same letter can take on different sounds. For example, sound the t in
versus
the in
versus
the in
versus
the
in
versus
the
in
versus
the
in
versus
and the s in
versus
The letter takes on two
consonant sounds ("k" and "s") as it is pronounced in most words (ax),
but it can also be sounded as "z" (xylophone).
When a repeated consonant makes only one sound it counts as only
one digit (button = 912 not 9112, and account = 721 not 7721), but
when a repeated consonant makes two different sounds it counts as two
digits (accent = 7021). A silent consonant is disregarded; it has no value
if you don't hear it when pronouncing a word: limb = 53 not 539 (but
limber = 5394); bought = 91 not 971; loiife = 28 not 728; could = 71
not 751; scene = 02 not 072 (but scan = 072). Two different consonants
together represent only one digit if they form only one sound (tack =
17 not 177; acquaint = 721 not 7721).
Two special combination sounds are not included in the display
above. One is the "zh" sound (as in measure, vision, azure), which is
very similar to the "sh" sound and is usually treated the same (representing 6). The other is the "ng" sound (as in sing and sang, which is
usually treated the same as "hard g" (representing 7). However, some
people treat "ng" as two different sounds, "n" and "g" (representing 27).
The important consideration, as with the other examples, is that you go
by what you hear and that you be consistent. Whichever method you
prefer, remember that it is the sound that is important: angle = 75;
angel = 265; engage - 276.
By now you can appreciate what I meant when I said that the
Phonetic system is more complex than the other mnemonic systems,
and thus takes more effort to learn. You will need to spend some time
studying this section. However, I believe that the many potential uses of
the Phonetic system justify the effort expended in learning it. The
sounds representing each digit should be learned thoroughly.
Many of the examples already discussed, plus others that will help

ratio
patio; c ace
act; g age
ghost
tough; ch church
chronic;
singe;
sore
sure.
x

ago; gh
ng sing

176

YOUR MEMORY

illustrate the differences between sound and letter, are contained in the
following display. This display shows examples of different consonants
and consonant combinations that can represent each digit. (It includes
consonant combinations that make a unique sound, but does not include
numerous consonant combinations in which one of the consonants is
simply silent, such as debt, psalm, island, and mnemonic.

Digit Sound Examples
1

t
th
d

tot (11), letter (514)
then (12), thin (12)
did (11),ladder (514)

2

n

noon (22), winner (24)

3

m

mummy (33)

4

r

roar (44), barrel (945), cojonel (7425)

5

1

My (55)

6

j
sh

judge (66), gradual (7465)
she (6), ratio (46), ocean (62), anxious (angshus = 760),
special (0965), tissue (16), emulsion (3562), fascism (8603),
machine (362), sure (64)
choose (60), witch (6), conscious (7260), cello (65), Czech (67)
gem (63), exaggerate (70641)

ch
softg

q

7

k

kite (71), back (97), chaos (70), xerox (zeroks = 0470)
cpit (71), acguit (71)
hard c cow (7), account (721)
hard g gagged (771), exam (egzam = 703)

8

f
v

food (81), off (8), ghone (82), cough (78)
oven (82), savvy (08), of (8), Stephen (0182)

9

p
b

gogped (991)
bobbed (991)

0

z
s

zoo (0), buzz (90), xerox (zeroks = 0470), scissors (0040),
sue (0), tossed (101), scissors (0040), pretzel (94105), xerox
(zeroks) = 0470)
circus(0470)

c

How to Use It
After the consonant sounds representing each digit have been thoroughly
learned, the Phonetic system can then be used in two general areas:
words can be constructed to serve as a mental filing system for use in
the same way as the Loci and Peg systems, and any numerical information can be coded into words to make it easier to learn.

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic Mnemonic

177

Mental filing system.

The Phonetic system can be used to construct
words to serve as a mental filing system just like the Loci and Peg
systems. To keep it straight whether I am talking about the Peg system
or the Phonetic system, I will refer to the Peg system words as
"pegwords" and the Phonetic system words as "keywords" (not to be
confused with the Keyword mnemonic in chapter 7). The keywords are
constructed by combining vowels with the consonants. For example,
there are many words that could represent the number 1: doe, day,
die,
and
For reasons discussed in
chapter 7, it would be best to use a concrete word; thus, toe would be
better than the. Also, it will probably work better for most people to
choose a keyword that begins with the consonant sound (such as tea or
than one that ends with the sound (such as
or
We saw in the last chapter that one problem with the Peg system is
that rhyming or look-alike pegwords are hard to find for numbers beyond
10 and even harder for numbers beyond 20. The Phonetic system does
not have this limitation. Two-digit numbers are represented by a keyword
that begins with a consonant sound representing the first digit and ends
with a consonant sound representing the second digit. For example, the
number 13 could be represented by
or
and the
number 25 could be represented by
or
The procedure
for three-digit numbers is the same: for 145 you could use
or
Numbers of more than two digits are sometimes difficult to
represent by a single word, and may require two words or a phrase. For
example, 889 may be represented by "ivy fob," and 8890 by "five apes."
Keywords for numbers up to 100 can easily be constructed by
combining consonants and vowels. Examples of possible keywords for
the numbers from 1 to 20 are the following:

tie, toe, tea, eat, hat, head, wade,

the.

doe)

eat head).

twirl.

1 = tie
2 = Noah
3 = ma
4 = ray
5 = law
6 = jay
7 = key
8 = fee
9 = pie
10 = toes

tomb, dome, dime,
nail, Nile, kneel.
trail, drill,

11 =
12 =
13 =
14 =
15 =
16 =
17 =
18 =
19 =
20 =

tot
tin
tomb
tire
towel
tissue
tack
taffy
tub
nose

The sample keywords above all start with the primary digit from the
previous display, but that is not essential (for example,
and
could be used for 7, 13, and 16, respectively). Several possible
keywords for each number from 1 to 100 are listed in the appendix.

dish

cow, dime,

178

YOUR MEMORY

(Additional phonetic keywords for each number up to 1,000 have been
listed elsewhere; and, as has been mentioned, several keywords for
most numbers up to 10,000 were listed by Fauvel-Gouraud.)4 You should
choose one keyword that you can visualize easily for each number and
use it consistently. The keywords serve as your mental filing system.
They are used in the same way as the locations are used in the Loci
system and the pegwords are used in the Peg system. Thus, the first
item to be learned would be associated with tie, the second item with
Noah, and the twentieth item with nose (or whatever keywords you
select). Recall also proceeds the same as with the Loci and Peg systems.
You think first of the number, then the keyword, and then the item that
was associated with the keyword.
You can expand your basic 100-word list to 1,099 words by learning
only 10 more words. The 10 words are adjectives that represent the
numbers from 1 to 10; examples might be: wet = 1, new = 2, my = 3,
hairy = 4, oily - 5, huge = 6, weak = 7, heavy = 8, happy = 9,
dizzy = 10. For numbers from 101 to 1,099 you would use your regular
keyword to represent the last two digits of each number, and the
adjective to represent the first digit; for example, wet tie = 101, new
tie = 201, hairy chin = 462, happy movie = 938, and dizzy baby =
1,099.

Remembering numbers.

The second major area in which the Phonetic
system is useful is in coding numerical information into words, so that
the information will be more meaningful and easier to associate. Numerous examples of this use are presented later in this chapter.
The appendix lists several possible keywords for each number in
order to provide additional keywords so that you can avoid using the
same word too many times in coding a series of numbers. For example,
you will have less interference if you code the number 6149234949 by
linking "sheet-rope-gnome-rib-robe" than if you linked "sheet-ropegnome-rope-rope." Also, if you were memorizing several phone numbers, for example, that had the number 72 in them, you would likely get
less interference among them if you used several different words for 72
than if you used the same word in all of your associations.
HOW WELL DOES THE PHONETIC SYSTEM WORK?
Less research has been done on the Phonetic system than on the Link,
Loci, and Beg systems for the obvious reason that it takes more time
and effort to master the Phonetic system before it can be used. Thus, it
is harder for a researcher to teach the system to a group of people and

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic Mnemonic

179

have them use it effectively in the same experimental session. Nevertheless, a few studies have investigated the effectiveness of the Phonetic
system.
Research Evidence
The earliest experimental studies on the Phonetic system were three
studies done in the 1960s, which indicated that the Phonetic system
keywords helped in learning lists of 20 words. Additional research in the
early and mid-1970s found that the keywords were effective in learning
three consecutive 20-word lists and two 25-word lists, that the keywords
were equivalent in effectiveness to the loci and pegwords, and that one
person's similar system was effective in learning three-digit numbers.5
Whereas most earlier studies investigated the use of the Phonetic
system as a mental filing system, a few studies in the 1980s have
investigated its use for remembering numbers. One study found that the
Phonetic system did not help in learning metric equivalences or in
remembering them four weeks later. A second study corrected what the
researchers felt were methodological weaknesses in the first study;
people were given 5 minutes of instruction in the Phonetic system and 3
minutes to learn 20 two-digit numbers. They remembered more than
twice as many digits as did people who were not taught the Phonetic
system (15.7 versus 7.0). A third study found that with 10 minutes of
instruction people could even remember four- and six-digit numbers
more effectively. However, when people had to make up their own
keywords to code the numbers while learning them (rather than use
keywords provided by the researcher), the Phonetic system actually
hindered their performance. This finding suggests the system cannot be
used effectively unless it is learned well and practiced before it is used.6
Several of the mnemonists with exceptional memories featured in
chapter 3 used the Phonetic system to achieve their feats. One person
(T. E.) who was well practiced in using the Phonetic system was able to
use it to duplicate the memory feats of Luria's S with number matrices
as well as feats of other famous mnemonists. Six students who completed
my memory course also tried to use the Phonetic system to duplicate
S's feat of memorizing a 4 x 5 matrix of 20 digits in 40 seconds. As we
saw in chapter 3, one student did it in less than 40 seconds (36 seconds),
and three other students did it in less than 60 seconds. One mental
calculator used the Phonetic system to store numbers in his memory
while doing complex math problems, such as squaring six-digit numbers
in his head.7
Using a system similar to the Phonetic system, another person was

180

YOUR MEMORY

able to learn a number sequence of 1,152 digits in 34V2 hours over
several days, and after three months he could still recall two-thirds of the
digits. In the same amount of study time without the system he learned
only about one-third as many digits, and after three months he could not
recall any of them.8
The Phonetic system has been studied in a unique application to
learning French vocabulary words. The learners first learned a list of
Phonetic keywords in French; for example, the (tea) = 1, rot (king) =
4. They then associated these keywords with new French vocabulary
words. The meanings of the vocabulary words were learned using the
Keyword mnemonic described in chapter 7. By associating the words
with the Phonetic keywords, learners could practice mentally recalling
the new vocabulary words by using the keywords as cues. Several
research studies found that this approach helped people learn lists of
French vocabulary words (both concrete and abstract, familiar and unfamiliar), and even helped in learning a grammatical gender.9
Some researchers have analyzed the effectiveness of the Phonetic
system in terms of trying to explain why it works, and have suggested
that it makes effective use of principles such as meaningfulness and
organization, illustrating the point made in chapter 7 that mnemonic
systems use the basic principles of memory.10
Demonstrations
When I give lectures on memory I often begin with a demonstration for
which I use the Phonetic system keywords. I write the numbers from 1
to 20 on the chalkboard, and the audience makes up a list of 20 words by
calling out the numbers one at a time with a word to write after each
number. A volunteer from the audience writes the words on the board
as they are called out, while I standfacingthe audience with my back to
the board. After the list is completed I tell the audience that I am going
to repeat all the words back to them without looking at the board, and I
usually ask, "How do you want them—forward, backward, or odd and
even?" This question generally produces looks of disbelief and a low roarof incredulous murmurs, and occasionally someone suggests something
like "start in the middle and work both ways," or "every third one." (If
there are no suggestions, I usually just recall them in reverse order from
20 to 1.) Of course, the order of recall does not matter with the Phonetic
system.
I have done this demonstration about 60 to 70 times since 1970 and
almost always recall all 20 words, although once I recalled only 18 words
and about a half-dozen times I recalled only 19 words. I have also tried

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic Mnemonic

181

this feat 4 times with 100 words but have not yet recalled all 100 words;
my recall has ranged from 93 to 97 words.
At age eleven, my son did this same demonstration with 20 words,
and my daughter at age thirteen remembered 49 of 50 words the first
time she tried the feat after learning keywords for numbers from 1 to
50. Further evidence that most people can achieve such feats is provided
by students in my memory course. On thefirstnight of class I read the
students a list of 20 numbered nouns in random order, and have them
recall as many as they can in correct numbered order. Later in the
course, after they have learned the Phonetic system, I give them the
same task with another 20-noun list. The following are the results for
more than 100 students in several classes: The percentage of students
achieving perfect recall of all 20 words was 7 percent before learning the
Phonetic system and 51 percent after using it on the later test. The
percentage recalling at least 18 of 20 words was 19 percent before
learning the Phonetic system and 83 percent after learning it. At the
other end of the performance scale, the percentage of students recalling
10 or fewer words was 28 percent before learning the Phonetic system
and 2 percent after learning it.
HOW CAN YOU USE THE PHONETIC SYSTEM?
The Phonetic system can be used for all of the uses described previously
for the Link, Loci, and Beg systems. Its main advantage over the Peg
system is that you can use it for long lists. Its main advantage over the
Loci system is that you can retrieve numbered items directly (of course,
the items do not have to be numbered). It has an additional advantage
over all previous systems in that you can use it to remember numbers.
A Mental Filing System
The Phonetic system keywords can be used as a literal mental filing
system, in a way similar to that described for the Loci system in chapter
10. I have used my keywords from 50 to 99, in groups of 10, for this
purpose: 50 to 59 for miscellaneous things to do; 60 to 69 for home and
family; 70 to 79 for church and civic; 80 to 89 for school; and 90 to 99
for miscellaneous ideas. Suppose that just as I am drifting off to sleep
one night I remember several things I have to do the next day. I
remember that I need to leave some money home for my son (home and
family), mail a letter on the way to work (miscellaneous things to do),
pick up some income tax forms (miscellaneous things to do), grade the
exams for a class (school), and order a book for another class (school). I

182

YOUR MEMORY

lot
exam,

letter, lion
books.

tax, juice

may form associations between:
(51) and
(52) and
(60) and
(80) and
and (81) and
Then in the
morning before I leave for school, I can take a quick mental search in
each category, do the things that need to be done in the morning, and
write the others down in my notebook if I wish.
Another way you could use at least 70 keywords is similar to
previous suggestions concerning use of the Loci and Beg systems every
day. To reduce day-to-day interference, it was suggested that you might
have a different set of loci or pegwords for each day. Similarly, you could
use your Phonetic keywords from 1 to 10 on Sunday, 11 to 20 on
Monday, 21 to 30 on Tuesday, and so on; this approach would eliminate
the interference that could result from using the same 10 keywords day
after day.
In chapter 1, a memory demonstration using a 50-page magazine
was described. To memorize a magazine I use my keywords to represent
the page numbers, and link what is on each page to the keyword.
Suppose, for example, that page 36 contained a picture of three people
in the upper right-hand corner, a report to the left of the picture on how
they broke the world's record for trio-flagpole-sitting, a poem on love in
the lower left-hand corner, and two ads in the lower right-hand corner
(one for vitamin pills and one for an effortless exerciser). I could
remember that information by using the Link system to form the
following link: match (36), picture of people, flagpole, heart (for love),
pill, and exerciser. This would give me the basicframeworkof what is on
page 36. I could fill in the details by reading the material carefully.
Remembering where each item was located on the page usually comes
almost without conscious effort (as was discussed in chapter 10), but it
may be aided by linking the items in order, say, from upper right to
upper left to lower left to lower right. The same procedure can be
adapted to studying other kinds of textual material.
If the material you want to remember is presented orally rather
than in written form, such as in a lecture or speech, you can associate
the first main point to
the second point to
and so on. Of
course, this procedure requires active concentration and participation in
the listening process.
The Phonetic system can serve as the basis for some amazing
memory feats with playing cards. One method involves representing each
card by a keyword that begins with the first letter of the suit of the card
and ends with the Phonetic sound representing the number of the card.
For example, the four of clubs could be car or core, and the nine of
spades could be sub or soap. Special procedures may be required for the
face cards. The card keywords can then be associated to help remember
them.

money, vase

tie,

fit

Noah,

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic Mnemonic

183

For people who play cards there are a number of card games in
which there are obvious advantages to being able to remember what
cards have been played. For those who do not play cards, a number of
amazing memory feats can be performed. You can look through a shuffled
deck of cards once and use the Link system to link the card keywords
together, and then name all the cards in order. Or you can associate
each card keyword with the Phonetic keywords from 1 to 52 and not
only name all the cards in order but tell what card is in any location. (For
example, "You'llfindthe four aces at positions 3,17, 37, and 41.") A fast
and easy, but impressive, demonstration is the missing-card stunt. Have
someone remove one or more cardsfromthe deck. You look through the
deck once and tell which cards are missing. This is done by mutilating
each card keyword as you come to it (see it broken, burned, etc.). Then
after you have looked through the deck, run through the card keywords
in your mind; the ones that are not mutilated are the ones that were
missing. This is also a way to keep track of cards that have been played
in some card games.
You could learn the numerical order of the letters of the alphabet by
associating each alphabet pegwordfromchapter 11 with the corresponding Phonetic keyword for 1 to 26; for example, hay-tie (A = 1), eye-pie
(I = 9), oar-taffy (R = 18). This would enable you to retrieve the letter
at any given numbered position without having to count through all the
letters until you reach that number. One of my memory class students
taught this method to his daughter, who was having a hard time arranging
words in alphabetical order. She then had no difficulty alphabetizing
words by converting the initial letters to numbers and ordering the words
numerically.
Phonetic keywords (or loci or pegwords) could be used for studying
lists of spelling words in a way similar to the research studies on French
vocabulaiy words. The keywords would not help you to remember the
spelling of the words themselves, but they would allow you to mentally
run over the word list and practice spelling the words at times when it is
not convenient to study the list or to have someone else read the words
to you.

Remembering Numbers
The unique advantage of the Phonetic system over the previous systems
is its usefulness in learning numbers. Much of the information we need
to remember consists of numbers: phone numbers, street addresses,
historical dates,financialdata, stock numbers, populationfigures,ages,
identification numbers, social security numbers, license plates, time

184

YOUR MEMORY

schedules, prices, style numbers, and so on. Unfortunately, numbers
are about the most abstract kind of material to remember.
There are at least two ways to use the Phonetic system to remember numbers. Both of them involve turning the numbers into words,
which are more meaningful. (When possible, of course, the words should
represent something concrete that can be visualized, but even when this
is not possible, most words will still be easier to remember than
numbers.) Thefirstway is to make up a word or phrase in which each of
the digits in the number translates into one of the consonant sounds in
order. The second way is to make up a phrase or sentence in which each
digit in the number translates into the first consonant sound in each
word. For example, to remember the number 60374 by the first approach, you might use "juicemaker;" by the second approach, you might
use, "She sews many gowns readily."
The following are a few examples of how selected numbers might
be coded: To remember my former automobile license plate number
(KFK 207) I thought of the German psychologist Kofjka as a "nice guy."
A clothes locker in a "gym I once visited was number C12-B (aisle C,
booth 12, locker B), which I remembered by cotton ball. The deepest
hole drilled by man is a gas well that went down 31,441 feet, which I can
picture being measured by a meter rod. The Empire State Building is
1,250 feet tall, and I can see itfilledwith tunnels. The highest man-made
structure in the world is a radio mast in Poland that rises 2,119 feet; I
can see myself on the top. The Carlsbad Caverns reach a depth of 1,320
feet, at which depth I can imagine demons. The highest waterfall in the
world is in Venezuela; it falls 3,212 feet, as high as a mountain. I can
remember the 1980 population of the town where I was born and
raised—Spokane, Washington—by imagining myself returning home "to
get mazes" (171,300). I can see a square mile covered with chairs to
remember that it equals 640 acres, or associate a mile with digit to
remember that it equals 1.61 kilometers.
If the word or phrase bears some meaningful relationship to the
item it represents (such as the Carlsbad Caverns example) then the
association will be most memorable, but even if the relationship is
arbitrary (such as the Spokane population example), the association will
still be more memorable than an abstract number would have been.
You can make modifications for numbers with decimals by using
words beginning with "s" only for decimals, and using the s as the initial
letter to represent a decimal point. If no number precedes the decimal,
"s" indicates the decimal point (.51 = salt, .94 = sparrow, .734 =
skimmer, etc.). If a number precedes the decimal, use two separate
words; the decimal word begins with "s" (945.51 = barley sold, 3.1416
= my store dish, etc.).11

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic Mnemonic

185

People who must remember formulas, equations, and other mathematical expressions may be able to adapt a procedure that one of my
memory students suggested to me. The procedure incorporates several
mnemonics. Letters are represented by alphabet pegwords. Numbers
are represented by Phonetic words. Symbols are represented by objects
that remind you of the symbol; examples include a house for the squareroot sign (vO, a slide for the slash representing division (/), a pie for
pi (n), and a cross for the plus sign (+). Thus, you might remember the
formula for finding the volume of a sphere (4/3rcr3)by linking "sphereray-slide-ma-pie-oar-cube. "
I used the Phonetic system to memorize all the phone numbers of
more than 100 members of a group to which I belong. The first two
digits are the same for all phone numbers in our area, so I made up a
word or phrase to represent the last five digits of each number. Then I
made up substitute words to represent the names of the people (see
chapter 13). The association of each name with its number was a pairedassociate task. The following are a few examples: Evans, 59941 (ovens,
wallpapered); Wille, 79812 (will, cup of tin); James, 77970 Gesse James,
cookbooks); Taylor, 41319 (tailor, ready-made bow).
Suppose you memorized a four-digit number like 1478 by associating
your keywords (say,
and
with the person. Later when you
recall the number you think of
and
but are not sure which
comes first: Is the number 1478 or 7814? One way to avoid this problem
is to use your regular keyword for the last two digits of a four-digit
number, and any word other than your keyword for the first two digits.
Thus, 1478 might be coded as "door cave" or "dry cave," and 7814 might
be coded as "calf tire" or "goofy tire."
A useful application for remembering numbers is remembering the
12-digit number we learned earlier for memorizing a year's calendar. For
example, the number for 1988 (376-315-374-264) could be represented
by the following: my cash, motel, mugger, injury. These terms could be
linked together in order by the Link or Story~system. This procedure
requires sequential retrieval. To allow direct retrieval of a given month's
digit, associate each digit's keyword directly with the month's substitute
word in a way similar to the procedure described previously for the Peg
system (associate
with
with
with
with ape, etc.).
Methods have been devised using the Phonetic system to learn one
12-digit number for the months and a key digit for each year by which
you could remember the day of the week for every date in the twentieth
century.121 used one of these methods to memorize the calendar for half
of the century (1950-1999). The mental arithmetic is a little more
complex than that required for the use of a different 12-digit number

tire

ma

cave)
tire

jam, key

cave,

valentine, jay

march, ma

186

YOUR MEMORY

each year, but this feat can be accomplished by a person with a normal
memory using the appropriate system: It is not limited to mental wizards,
lightning calculators, or idiot savants.
You could also use the Phonetic system to remember dates of
birthdays and anniversaries. Suppose, for example, that a friend's birthday is on January 23 and that your parents' anniversary is on April 16.
One method for remembering these dates is to form associations among
the person, the month substitute word, and the date—"friend-jam-name"
and "parents-ape-tissue." Another method is to use a number where the
first digit represents the month and the last digit represents the date,
then turn that number into a word to associate with the person—"frienddenim"(l-23), and "parents-radish" (4-16).
You could construct a mental filing system for keeping track of daily
or weekly appointments in the same way as described for the Peg
system. Thus, if you need to go to the dentist next Monday at 10:00 and
take your car in for an oil change on Wednesday at 3:00, you could
associate "dentist-money-toes" and "oil-windy-ma." Another approach
to remembering appointments involves numbering the days of the week
rather than making up substitute words for them (Sunday = 1, Monday
= 2, etc.). Then you could represent each appointment by a number
indicating the day and time (Monday at 10:00 = 210, Wednesday at 3:00
= 43), and associate the appointment "with a Phonetic keyword for that
number (for example, "dentist-nuts" and "oil-room.").
The keywords could also be used in the same manner as the
pegwords to count things and keep track of your count. Thus, in keeping
count of my laps around the track (as I described for the Peg system) I
can vary the monotony and reduce interference by using the pegwords
one day and the keywords another day. In addition, with the Phonetic
keywords I would not be limited to counting only 10 laps but could easily
count up to 100 (not that I will ever run that many laps, but I do often
run more than 10; also, there may be other things that a person would
want to count that do go up to 100).
Other Uses
A program developed for learning scriptures is based on the Phonetic
system. Phonetic phrases were constructed for 1,200 selected verses in
the Bible. Each phrase is meaningfully related to the content of the verse
and also identifies the book, chapter, and verse numbers by the Phonetic
system. The books are represented by numbers giving their numerical
order in the Bible, rather than by their names. Here are a few examples:
A verse on the creation ("Let there be light," Genesis 1:2) is the phrase

Mental Filing Systems: Phonetic Mnemonic

187

"the dawn/' 1-1-2, representing the first book, first chapter, second
verse; the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20) are "no-nos," 2-20, representing the second book, twentieth chapter; the names of the 12 apostles
(Matthew 10:2) are "the dozen," 1-10-2, representing the first book in
the New Testament, tenth chapter, second vese. A scripture-learning
game has been developed based on this system, and the system and all
1,200 phonetic phrases have been put in book form.13
I used the Phonetic system to turn the multiplication tables into
word associations (for example, new ma = witch [ 2 x 3 = 6] and wash
key = rain [ 6 x 7 = 42]). Then I used these associations to help my
son learn all the times tables through the twelves when he was age seven
and in the second grade (the year before they started studying the times
tables in his school). One of my students had a sixteen-year-old learningdisabled nephew who had started over learning the times tables every
year in school but had never been able to learn them. She used these
associations to teach him the times tables, and reported that he was
finally able to learn them (and that this gave a positive boost to his selfimage).
Reports from my memory students show additional ways they found
to use the Phonetic system in response to a homework assignment to
use it for something they wanted to learn. These included learning such
items as phone numbers, postal ZIP codes, scripture verses and chapters, birthdays, highs and lows for selected Dow Jones stocks, page
numbers of hymns in a hymnal, spectral frequencies in organic chemistry,
19 parts of a saddle, exercises in a routine, 62 terms in a psychology
class, and the starting checklist for operation of a tram.
As was the case with the other mnemonic systems, there are many
more possible uses for the Phonetic system besides those mentioned in
this chapter. Memory-training books suggest additional uses, give more
detail on some of the possible uses suggested in this chapter (for
example, the mental filing system for remembering daily appointments,
and the methods for remembering dates and playing cards), and give
examples of how the system can be applied in various occupations.14
In chapter 9 I suggested that you might get more out of chapters 7
and 8 after you have read about the mnemonic systems. Now that you
have read about the systems, you might find it interesting and beneficial
to reread those two chapters; some of the points in those chapters might
be more meaningful now.

Using Mnemonics:
Remembering People's
Names and Faces

P

erhaps the most common memory complaint is the inability to
remember people's names. This was demonstrated in one of my
recent memory workshops consisting of a broad cross-section of people—more than 500 people ranging in age from thirteen to eighty-one,
and representing more than 80 different occupations and two dozen
states (and two other countries). At the beginning of the workshop I
asked them for written questions they would like to have answered about
memory. By far the largest number of questions (41 percent) were on
the subject of remembering people's names. (The next most common
subject was studying and schoolwork at 15 percent.) Memory for names
is also among the most frequent memory concerns of special populations,
such as the elderly and brain damaged. One large survey that included
more than 500 elderly people found forgetting of names to be the most
frequent of 18 potential memory complaints, and name memory has also
been found to be one of the most frequent complaints of memoryimpaired patients.1
Just because people learn how to remember lists, speeches, numbers, cards, or anything else discussed so far in this book does not
necessarily mean they will be able to remember names and faces.
188

Using Mnemonics: Remembering People's Names and Faces 189

Memory for names must be trained just like any other kind of memory.
You must learn the techniques and practice using them. The following
two examples illustrate this fact, as well as the importance of interest.
In chapter 3, a man (V. P.) with an amazing verbal memory was
discussed. Despite his impressive memory for verbal material, V. P.
observed that his ability to remember faces was not unusually good. He
Med to recognize the wife of one of the researchers on meeting her at
the store where he works, although he had met her socially on two or
three occasions. He commented, "It's really applications of memory that
are of importance in the learning process. That politician . . . would
certainly remember your wife by name and face, no matter what the
circumstances in which he met her."
Similarly, Bob Barker, the host of a TV show, meets many people
on each show and remembers their names. When he was asked what his
secret was for remembering people's names, he replied, "It's all concentration. People on the show are my tools. I must know their names. It's
my job. But introduce me to people at a cocktail party, and I can't
remember who they are two minutes later."
When we forget a person's name we may be subject to embarrassing
moments. For example, Clare Boothe Luce, former ambassador to Italy,
was introduced at a gathering to David Burpee,flower-and vegetableseed distributor. A short time later she could not remember his name,
but did not say anything. Sensing her embarrassment, he said quietly,
"I'm Burpee." Mrs. Luce replied, "That's quite all right. I'm sometimes
troubled that way myself."2
In this chapter we will look at some research on how we remember
names and faces, at a system for improving memory for names and
faces, and at some evidence on how well the system works.
HOW DO WE REMEMBER NAMES AND FACES?
There has been a great deal of research on memory for people, including
personality traits, behavior, physical features, faces, and names. More
of this research has focused on memory forfacesthan on any other area
(and it has been conducted in short-term tasks in the research lab more
than in real-world settings). One reason for this interest in face memory
is the real-world task of eyewitness identification in crimes; several books
reporting research on eyewitness testimony have been published in the
1980s.3
Despite the widespread practical interest in remembering people's
names, there was very little research on memory for names before the
mid-1970s. Since then, research interest in name memory has grown,

190

YOUR MEMORY

resulting in more than three dozen studies on memory for names from
the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s. However, this is still much less research
than has been done on memory for faces.4
Remembering names and faces is a paired-associate: task: In most
situations we see the face and recall the name; the face serves as the
cue and the name serves as the response. Remembering faces is easier
for most people than remembering names for at least three reasons:
1. We generally see the face but only hear the name, and most people
remember things they see better than things they hear.
2. We saw in chapter 3 that pictures (faces) are easier to remember
than words (names). Faces are treated differently from names in
memory, and may even be treated differentlyfromother pictures.5
3. As was noted in chapter 2, face memory is a recognition task whereas
name memory is a recall task. If name memory were put in the form
of a multiple-choice question (people had four names printed on their
foreheads and we just had to recognize the right one), we would not
have nearly as much trouble "remembering" people's names.
Recognizing Faces
A common form of paramnesia (mild amnesia involving distortion
more than forgetting) is the everyday experience of encountering a
relatively well-known person but not being able to identify him. This "I
can't quite place him" phenomenon usually occurs when we meet the
person outside the normal context, and often leads to a perplexed and
preoccupying attempt to place the person. One interesting characteristic
of the phenomenon is that it seems to represent recognition without
complete recall.6
Almost all of the research on memory for faces uses recognition
rather than recall as the memory measure. The procedure in most such
research is to show pictures of faces to people, and then have them pick
thefacesthey have just seenfroma larger number of faces. Let us look
at some of the revelant findings concerning such recognition memory for
faces.
There is a considerable amount of difference among people in their
ability to remember faces accurately. One study found no significant
correlation for college students between memory for pictures of faces in
the research lab and memory for faces of real people (their classmates).
In fact, the students were not even very consistent in how well they
remembered real people. A study of housewives found no relationship
between how good they said their memory for faces was and how good

Using Mnemonics: Remembering People's Names and Faces 191

it actually was. Several studies have found differences between male and
female subjects in their memory for faces, but the results have not been
consistent in terms of which sex remembers faces better.7
Young adults usually remember single-view pictures of faces better
than the elderly do. For example, young women in their late teens or
twenties remembered single-view pictures better than elderly women.
However, the elderly women remembered multiview pictures (which
more closely resemble how we see people in real life) just as well as the
younger women did. Similarly, a study of college professors from ages
36 to 75 found no significant age differences in their memory for names
and faces of former students. However, one study found that while there
were only minimal age differences between young and elderly adults in
recognizing faces and judging whether thefaceshad changed (in expressions or poses), the elderly did not perform as well in.specifying exactly
how thefaceshad changed.8
Although there are differences among people in their recognition
memory for faces, such memory for most people is quite good. One
study found a 96-percent recognition accuracy; another study found that
people in their fifties and sixties still recognized 75 percent of their high
school classmates'faces,and that memory for faces declined more slowly
than memory for names.9
Recognition Versus Recall
Recall of faces is much harder than recognition because most people
have an inadequate vocabulary to describe faces, and because face recall
is lessfrequentlyneeded than recognition; yet recall of faces has'been
called the most important and most difficult practical problem for research on memory of faces.10
One problem in studying recall offacesis the difficulty of checking
the accuracy of recall. Methods have been developed to try to overcome
this problem. The Photo-Fit Kit consists of a number of separate features
that a person puts together to construct a face. It was designed to enable
witnesses to reconstruct thefacesof people who were wanted for police
questioning. However, people using the kit have difficulty reconstructing
a face even when the originalfaceis present, and it is even harder when
the face has to be recalled from memory.11 This poor recall of faces
contrasts with the typically high scores for recognition measures of face
memory.
One study compared recall of names andfaces.People were given
the names of some famous people, and were asked to imagine the faces.
They were shown thefacesof other people, and were asked to recall the

192

YOUR MEMORY

names. Reported recall of the face given the name was more frequent
than recall of the name given the face (but accuracy of recall was not
measured). Another study tried measuring both names and faces by both
recognition and recall. For the recognition measure people were shown a
series of names or faces, and then shown a larger set of names or faces
and asked to pick the ones they had just seen. They were then tested
for recall of names by being shown the faces and being asked to recall
the names. They were tested for recall of faces by being shown the
names and by reporting whether they could recall the faces. Recognition
yielded higher accuracy scores than recall both for names (97 percent
versus 36 percent) and for faces (91 percent versus 54 percent).12
In a study of college professors' memory for former students, name
recognition was actually better than face recognition. The strength of
recognition in measuring memory for names is also shown by the finding
that 15 years after graduation from high school, people can recall only
about 15 percent of their classmates' names but can recognize 90 percent
of the names from a list of names. Recognition of names has also been
found to be faster than recogniton of faces.13
All of this evidence points to the fact that one of the main reasons
why name memory is more of a problem than face memory for most
people is because name memory is usually a recall task and face memory
is usually a recognition task.
Other Factors Affecting Name Memory
In a study on the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon (see chapter 2), at
least half of such experiences reported by both young and elderly adults
involved memory for proper names.
Names tend to be harder to remember than other words. One
reason might be that most names are not as common as most words.
One study found that surnames were more difficult to recall than other
verbal items because of a difference in objective frequency, and the
researcher suggested that there also may be a different associative
memory network for surnames than for other verbal material.14
We saw in earlier chapters that one strategy that may help in
recalling a name is to try to recall anything else about the person you
can, such as where you met her. For example, we saw that people who
tried to recall the names of high school classmates 4 to 19 years after
graduation were aided by thinking of settings in which they saw them;
they reconstructed scenes and tried to think of who was there. Similarly,
in trying to remember a famous person's name when shown his picture,
people first try to locate the person's profession, then the place where

Using Mnemonics: Remembering People's Names and Faces 193

they may have seen him, and then when they last saw the person. The
more you know about a person the more paths you have to try to retrieve
the name. Thinking of what a person looks like when trying to recall his
or her name also may help bring the name to you. When people tried to
recall the name of an object when given its definition, they frequently
could recall a visual image of the object before—or even instead of—
recalling the name. Even recognition memory for faces can be affected
by the context, including the context of other information about the
person as well as the physical context.15
One study investigated the effect of "priming" on recall of authors'
names given the titles of their well-known literary works. Priming is a
brief glance at a list of authors' names before testing of the names with
the titles of their works. Recall of the names was better if the people
were primed beforehand with a list of the names.16 Suppose you were
going to attend a high school reunion or an organization picnic. You might
apply this idea of priming by looking over the names of your former
classsmates or fellow employees before going. This review calls the
names to the fore of your awareness and makes them more readily
accessible.
One study found that introducing a person's name later in the course
of a conversation produced better recall than early introductions. College
students were introduced to another student via a 3- or 6-minute
videotape. The other student talked about herself, her family, and
school. On the short tape she gave her name in the first minute and
talked for 2 more minutes; on the longer tape she gave her name in the
fourth minute and talked for 2 more minutes. For the early introduction
only 4 of 22 students remembered her name, but for the late introduction
all 22 students remembered her name. The researcher suggested that if
people were given a little time to familiarize themselves with a new
person beore they were introduced to the new name, they might have
better attention, experience less interference, and have more retrieval
cues to which the name could be associated.17 However, thisfindingmay
be difficult to apply; in introducing people it is hard not to say the name
first because that is what people expect. Perhaps the introducer could
repeat the person's name again later. If you are trying to remember
someone's name, ask about it later in the conversation after you have
learned a little about the person.
This section has focused on research that shows some of the factors
influencing memory for names and faces. These factors include recognition versus recall, context, priming, and timing of name introduction. In
the next section we will look at additional factors that are incorporated
into a system for improving memory for names and faces.

194

YOUR MEMORY

A SYSTEM FOR REMEMBERING NAMES AND FACES
One of the most common reasons people enroll in memory-training
courses is to improve memory for names and faces. Most popular
memory-training books devote at least one chapter to memory for names
and faces, and an entire book has even been devoted to the subject.18
Virtually every memory author and expert proposes his "system" for
remembering names. One system may consist of three steps, another of
five or six steps. All the systems contain essentially the same basic
strategies but differ in how they divide them. The first four of the five
steps in this section capture the essence of virtually all memory systems
for names.
Further details on each of the following steps for remembering
names andfacesmay be found in many memory-training books, and you
can read those books if you want more explanation and examples of
these strategies. However, the main determinant of your memory for
names is your awareness of these steps, and then your practice of them.19
Nowhere are the myths from chapter 1 concerning the search for a
simple, easy "secret" to memory more applicable than in remembering
names. I have met many people who want to know the secret of
remembering names, but when they are told the secret (as described in
this system), they dismiss it as too much work or they do not think it
will really help.
The following five steps are used by most people who have exceptional ability to remember people's names:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Make sure you get the name.
Make the name meaningful.
Focus on a distinctive feature of the person's appearance.
Associate the name with the distinctive feature.
Review the association.

Each step is discussed below, along with some relevant research
findings. As you read, notice how many of the memory principles and
strategiesfromearlier chapters are involved in these steps (for example,
meaningfulness, association, attention, visual imagery, review, repetition, recitation, and substitute words).
Step 1: Get the Name
It was suggested in chapter 4 that failure to pay attention may be the
single most common reason why we "forget" the names of people we
are introduced to: We never really got the name in thefirstplace. Often

Using Mnemonics: Remembering People's Names and Faces 195

when we are introduced to someone our mind is on something else.
Maybe we are waiting to hear our own name said, or are trying to think
of something clever to say after the introduction.
An "I know the face but not the name" phenomenon is a milder
version of the "I can't quite place him" phenomenon noted earlier. A
person is recognized and appropriately identified, but his name cannot
be recalled. One psychologist suggested that this phenomenon seems to
involve partial forgetting due to lack of attention in the original situation;
we typically pay less attention to names than to appearances. The
importance of attention is also shown by thefindingthat people who are
highly self-conscious recall names worse than people who are not
particularly self-conscious. The researchers suggested that this may be
because the attention of self-conscious people is focused more on
themselves than on other people.20
Even when you are paying attention, you may not get a person's
name if it is spoken too fast or too quietly. If this happens, stop the
person or introducer and ask him to repeat the name. This seems
obvious, so why don't people do it more often? One reason may be that
they do not want to seem rude by interrupting theflowof the conversation. Or it may be that they are somewhat embarrassed that they did not
get the name; but they are likely to be even more embarrassed later
when they cannot remember the name.
Regardless of how many steps are in any "expert's" system for
remembering names, the first step in virtually every system consists of
some way of forcing you to get the name. Use the name in the
conversation, repeat it, spell it aloud, work it over, ask about it. These
activities help you make sure you get the name. They force you to
concentrate your attention on it. Repeating the name and using it involves
applying the principles of repetition and recitation discussed in chapters
5 and 6. Of course, this can be overdone, but you can use the name at
least 3 times without appearing too obvious—once when you first meet
the person, once during the conversation, and once when parting. (For
example, "I'm happy to meet you Mr. Jones," then later, "What do you
think about that, Mr. Jones?" and finally, "It was nice talking with you,
Mr. Jones.")
Another technique that can help you get the name is to write it
down when possible. This forces you to pay attention to it. In addition,
people remember words better when they see and hear them than when
they only see or only hear them.21 Similarly, looking at a name in addition
to hearing it should helpfixit morefirmlyin your memory.
Research has found that memory for names can be improved
significantly even without any additional steps or particular mnemonic
technique if people merely concentrate on the name and pay attention to

196

YOUR MEMORY

it.22 Thus, you will notice an improvement in your ability to remember
people's names even if all you do is form the habit of making sure you do
something to get the name whenever you are introduced to someone.
However, you can improve even more by going beyond this first step.
Step 2: Make the Name Meaningful
After you get the name, you should make the name meaningful and
concrete. This is not hard for names that already have meaning. Many
names have meaning in themselves or through association with something
that is meaningful. Look through a phone book and you may be surprised
at how many surnames already have meaning to you. There are names
of cities or countries (London, Holland), colors (White, Green), occupations (Barber, Cook), adjectives (Strong, Short), famous people (Lincoln,
Ford), metals (Silver, Steel), plants (Rose, Oaks), animals (Wolf, Lamb),
things (Hammer, Ball), and commercial products (Dodge, Hershey).
For names that do not have any readily apparent meaning, you can
use the principle of substitute words discussed in chapter 7 to give
meaning to the name. For example, hug bee may represent "Higbee,"
wood taker may represent "Whittaker," paw low ski may represent
"Paloski," fresh neck may represent "Frischknecht," hunt singer may
represent "Huntzinger," magnet mare may represent "McNamara," saw
press key may represent "Zabriski," mule stein may represent Muhlestein," lamb or row may represent "Lamoreaux," and awl storm may
represent "Ahlstrom." I picked these examples from a telephone directory. A good way to acquire the skill of making substitute words is to
practice with the names in a phone directory. One book on remembering
people lists possible substitute words for hundreds of common given
names and surnames.23
Even if you come across an occasional name that you cannot make
meaningful in the time you have available, merely having tried to do so
will help you remember the name better because you have had to focus
your attention on the name in order to try to find a meaningful substitute
word (step 1).
Step 3: Focus on the Face
The next step is to note a distinctive feature of the person's face or
appearance, a feature that will be likely to first attract your attention the
next time you meet him. The purpose of focusing on the face is to find
something distinctive that will help you recognize it.

Using Mnemonics: Remembering People's Names and Faces 197

Carefully studying a face can increase your memory for it. Several
studies have found that making a judgment about a person's traits (for
example, honesty, friendliness, intelligence) improves face recognition
even more than judgments about physical characteristics in children,
young adults, and elderly adults. These findings suggest that to remember a person's face you should try to make a number of difficult personal
judgments about his face when you are first meeting him. Of course,
making personal judgments is just one way of producing a deeper level of
processing by making you concentrate on the features of the person. In
one study people who studied faces for the purpose of looking for their
most distinctive feature remembered the faces as well as if they had
made personal judgments. In fact, in another study people who were just
told to remember the faces remembered them better than people who.
made superficial judgments.24
Many people who are not used to studying faces have a hard time at
firstfindingsomething really distinctive about every face. All faces include
the same basic features—two eyes, a nose, and a mouth, with a couple
of ears sticking out from the sides. How can you make that distinctive?
Actually, there are many distinguishing features in a face, but you must
train yourself to look for them. Once you do, you will see much more in
a face, just as a botanist on a walk through the forest sees many
differences in plants that look the same to most people, or a geologist
sees many differences in rocks that are indistinguishable to the untrained
eye.
For example, studies teaching a computer to distinguish among
faces used at least 21 different aspects of facial features.25 These facial
features included characteristics of the hair (coverage, length, texture,
shade), mouth (upper-lip thickness, lower-lip thickness, lip overlap,
width), eyes (width of opening, distance apart, shade), nose (length, tip,
shape), ears (length, protrusion), eyebrows (bushiness, distance apart),
chin (shape), forehead (slant), and cheeks (fullness). Each of the 21
features was further divided into two or three characteristics—for
example, hair coverage (full, receding, bald), nose (tip upward, horizontal, downward), and cheeks (sunken, average, full)—for a total of more
than 60 specific characteristics available to distinguish faces. In addition,
you may note features that are unique to one person, such as dimples, a
cleft in the chin, or lines in the forehead.
We tend to remember faces that are distinctive and distinguishable
better than those that are not. For example, we remember very attractive and very unattractive faces better than moderately attractive faces;
we remember faces of members of our own race better than those of

198

YOUR MEMORY

another race. Even an expression on a face, such as a smile, can help
make it distinctive enough to aid memory for it.26 However, a feature as
changeable as a smile would not be a good feature to base your
recognition on, because the person may not smile the next time you see
him; the same suggestion holds for other nonpermanent features, such
as whether the person is wearing glasses.
Which features are the most helpful in distinguishing among faces?
Research findings are not consistent. One review of the research concluded that the hair is the most important single feature for the purposes
of the studies reviewed (recognition of faces from still photographs in a
research setting). Unfortunately, hair is also the most easily altered
feature, and the reviewers suggested that other features may be more
important in real-life interactions. There is also evidence that the eyes
may be the most helpful; however, other studies have not found a clear
superiority of any onefacialfeature.27 It may be that most people's eyes
reveal more about them than any otherfacialfeature, but it may not be
wise to try to distinguish a person on the basis of his eyes if he has a
bulbous nose, protruding ears, curly red hair, or some other definite
distinguishing feature.
A recent analysis of 128 research studies on eyewitness identification and face recognition found that ability to identify faces is significantly
affected by such variables as reinstating the context, depth of processing
strategies, face distinctiveness, and elaboration of thefaceat encoding.28
You may recognize these variables as some of the factors that have been
discussed so far in this chapter.
Step 4: Associate the Face with the Name
After you have made something meaningful of the person's name and
noted a distinctive feature of his appearance, you can form a conscious,
visual association between the name and the distinctive feature. For
example, if Mr. Ball has red hair, you could picture hundreds of red balls
coming out of his hair; if Ms. Cook has long eyelashes, you could picture
her eyelashes cooking; if Mr. Whittaker has large ears, you could picture
him carrying wood (wood taker) with his ears; if Mrs. McNamara has a
round mouth, you could picture a magnetridinga mare out of her mouth;
if Miss Huntzinger has dimples, you could picture a hunter sitting in her
dimple and singing.
The common criticism of this step (especially by people who have
not tried it) is that the next time you see that person you might think of
the substitute word but not the name. You might even call the person by
the substitute word or some other related name. I have lost count of how

Using Mnemonics: Remembering People's Names and Faces 199

many people have told me a story such as the one about the memory
student who met Mrs. Hummock. She had a big stomach so he decided
to use "stomach" as his association. Several weeks later when he saw
Mrs. Hummock again he looked at her large stomach (belly) and said,
"Hello, Mrs. Kelly!"
It is possible that you might remember a substitute word without
remembering the name it represents. That is one of the hazards of using
substitute words in visual associations (see chapter 8). Although this
system improves your memory, it does not necessarily make memory
perfect. But even if you did fail to recall a few names, you would probably
still recall more than you do without using substitute words.
Actually, although it is possible that the above problem can occur, it
is not very likely in practice. Usually only people who have not tried the
system will ask how they can be sure that they will not call Mrs.
Hummock "Mrs. Kelly" by mistake. People who have tried it know that
it usually does not happen.29 If a person remembers the facial features
and substitute word, he has about a 90 percent chance of remembering
the correct name. When errors do occur, they are usually a result of
poor association of the substitute word to the name. Thus, one psychologist has suggested that the trick is to practice being able to convert a
name to a memorable substitute word (step 2); after that, step 4 is
easy.30
Step 4 is, of course, the main reason for steps 2 and 3. We make
the name meaningful and find a distinctive feature so that we can
associate the two together. However, it should be noted that even if you
did not do step 4 or if it did not work perfectly for some names, having
done steps 2 and 3 would still increase the likelihood that you would
remember the person better than if you did nothing.
Step 5: Review the Association
We saw in chapter 6 that no matter how you learn something, you are
likely to forget it if you do not use it occasionally unless you review. Yet
this step is not even mentioned in most popular name-memory systems;
they give the impression that if you follow steps 1 through 4 you will
never forget people's names. If you really want to remember a name for
a long time, you should review it as soon as possible after meeting the
person, and then occasionally afterward. Gradually expanding intervals
between reviews have been found to be very effective. Repeat the
person's name immediately, and then say it again to yourself 10 to 15
seconds later (remember that most forgetting occurs soon after learning). Review it again after a minute or so, and then again several minutes

200

YOUR MEMORY

later.31 If you meet several people at one party or meeting, you might
review in your mind the names and faces of everyone you met immediately after the party or meeting is over.
Proactive interference (see chapter 3) has been found for faces as
well as for verbal material, suggesting that interference can affect
memory for faces as well as for names.32 To reduce the negative effects
of such interference when you meet several people in succession, you
might try to apply some of the principles for reducing interference from
chapter 6 when possible—meet the people in different rooms or different
parts of the room, space the introductions, and so on.
Since it takes some time to form associations, you may want to
arrange to meet people with a little break between introductions when
possible rather than having a lot of names thrown at you one after
another. Spacing the introductions not only helps reduce interference
and gives you time to make good associations but also gives you a chance
to review the names of the people you have met so far.
Whenever you can do so, write the names of people you have met
recently. In addition to the advantages already mentioned in step 1,
writing the names also makes it easier to review the names later.
HOW WELL DOES THE SYSTEM WORK?
It should not be too surprising to find evidence that this system works,
because the five steps incorporate the same principles and structure as
other effective mnemonics like the Keyword mnemonic and the Loci
system. In fact, one psychologist who felt that "memory tricks" are
helpful only for simple tasks, such as remembering a grocery list, even
conceded that an exception to the lack of practicality of mnemonics is
their use for associating names and faces.33
One student in my memory class reported meeting with a new
study group where the members all introduced themselves, and he tried
to apply as many of the techniques as he could from this chapter (which
he had just read that afternoon). After the introductions one group
member suggested that they all say their names once more so that he
could remember them. My student reported, "I asked if I could try to
repeat everyone's names, as I was taking this class in mnemonics and I
wanted to see if the , techniques discussed in the book really worked.
Well, it was really easy. The names came back so quick I couldn't believe
it. It was really a good experience because now I realize that it can be
done even by someone who has as hard a time at it as I do."
Another student, a man in hisfifties,told the class how he had been
a member of a club of about 150 men for 10 years, and he knew the

Using Mnemonics: Remembering People's Names and Faces 201

names of only about 30 or 40 of the members. At their next dinner
meeting, which was held after we had discussed names and faces in our
class, he made it a point to sit at a table where he did not know any of
the men. When they introduced themselves he made a special effort to
make sure he got each of the eight names. He then made a visual or
verbal association of each name with each person, used the names during
the night, and reviewed the associations. He reported to the class that,
somewhat to his surprise, he knew every man's name at the end of the
evening, and that he was going to continue the same strategy until he
knew the names of all 150 men in the club.
A man who attended one of my seminars for insurance agents in
Maryland wrote me a note describing his experience in trying out the
system. He reported that the morning after the seminar he practiced the
steps at a laundromat: "The results were amazing to me; 10 of 14 names
were properly recalled 15 to 30 minutes later. . . . It was fun. Most
people cooperated with my request to ask me to recall their names if
they left before I did."
One of the memory tests I give to the students in my memory
classes during the first few days of class is to remember the names of 15
people. I show the slides of the people's faces on the screen and
introduce each person to the class; I then give the students 10 to 15
seconds to look at the person before meeting the next person. Then I
rearrange the order of the slides and show each face again for about 10
seconds while the students try to write down the name of each person.
Near the end of the course, after they have studied this chapter and
practiced some of the steps, I give the students the same test with 15
other people. The following summary highlights the performance of
about 120 students in several classes: Before learning the system, 15
percent of the students remembered at least 12 of the 15 people's
names, and another 28 percent remembered only 5 or fewer names.
Using these steps on the second test, 3 times as many students (45
percent) remembered at least 12 names, and only 5 percent remembered
5 or fewer names.
Research studies also show the effectiveness of the system. In one
study 40 college students learned the names of 13 people from their
pictures; half of the students were then trained for 10 minutes on steps
2 through 4, and all of them were tested again. The trained group showed
almost an 80-percent improvement, while the other group showed no
improvement. (The trained group recalled an average of 10.2 names
versus 5.4 for the other group.) In a second study college students were
also taught steps 2 through 4 and were shown pictures of 20 people.
Unlike the students in the first study, these students did not make up

202

YOUR MEMORY

their own name-face associations; they were provided by the researcher.
The students remembered 3 times as many names as did other students
who were not taught the steps (an average of about 11 names versus
about 4 names). The study also found that all three steps were necessary
for maximum effectiveness, and that the weakest link was remembering
the visual association given the prominent feature of the face.34
Elderly adults have also been able to increase their memory for
names by using steps 2 through 4. They did even better when they were
also taught relaxation training to reduce anxiety, or were given the
additional task of rating their visual associations for pleasantness (which
forced them to focus more attention on the associations). Attempts to
help brain-damaged patients remember names by picturing the names
(either with drawings or mental images) have also helped, but the whole
system for name-face learning was too much for them to handle on their
own.35
Even more striking proof that the system works is provided by
people who are well trained in the system and who can remember the
names of hundreds of people after meeting them once. For example, one
memory performer has used these steps to meet several hundred people
in one night and call them all by name.36 Likewise, people have remembered thousands of names over periods of months or years by using
' these strategies. The mnemonist T. E. (see chapter 3) also used these
steps in achieving his exceptional memory for names.
I use the system to help me learn the names of all the students in
all my classes during the first week or two of each semester (sometimes
as many as 200 students). To help me in using these steps with large
classes, I take pictures of my classes so that I can study them outside of
class. This overcomes the difficulty of trying to associate names and
faces during class time when my mind must be on other things. I have
been doing this since 1972, and I still have pictures of all the students
who have taken classes from me since then. Not only do the pictures
help me to learn students' names but they also give me a useful
permanent file that I have occasionally referred to years later. Other
teachers have also found similar approaches to be helpful, and one college
instructor has his students apply these steps in small groups at the
beginning of the semester so that they will also know one another's
names.37

M
Using Mnemonics:
Absentmindedness and
Education

A

college professor walking across campus was stopped by a student
who asked him a question. When they finished talking, the
professor asked the student, "Which way was I walking?" The student
said, "You were going that way." "Good, then I've already had lunch,"
the professor said as he continued on his way.
This chapter discusses two areas in which memory aids can have
practical value—absentmindedness and schoolwork. These two areas do
not necessarily have any connection with each other except in "absentminded professor" jokes like the one above. Absentmindedness and
education are grouped together in this chapter merely because both
areas represent practical uses of mnemonics that are of widespread
interest and of relevance to many people.
ABSENTMINDEDNESS
Do you ever forget to mail a letter or to stop at the store for a loaf of
bread on the way home? Do you ever forget to make a telephone call or
to pass on a telephone message? Do you ever forget where you left your
keys, your glasses, or your pen? Do you ever forget whether you locked
the door, or turned off the lights or water at home? Have you ever
203

204

YOUR MEMORY

forgotten where you parked the car, or found the lights still on when you
returned to the car? Have you ever driven away from the gas pump with
the gas cap on the roof of the car? Have you ever caught yourself
squeezing shaving cream on your toothbrush or spraying deodorant on
your hair? Have you ever found yourself pushing someone else's shopping
cart in the . store, or getting completely undressed and ready for bed
when you just intended to change your shirt? Do you ever go into the
other room to get or do something and then forget why you are there?
These are just a few examples of the wide range of experiences
that fall under the heading of "absentmindedness." Is there something
wrong with you if you can answer "yes" to some of these questions? No.
Everyone has such experiences. One survey of 85 people yielded more
than 600 specific examples of absentminded behavior like those listed
above, falling into more than 30 different categories. There has been
quite a lot of research interest in absentmindedness during the past
decade, and much of the research has been summarized in two books
from which some of the research and ideas in this chapter are drawn.1
Of all the principles of memory discussed earlier in this book, the
one that is probably the most directly relevant to absentmindedness is
attention. Failure to pay attention is a major contributing factor to most
absentminded actions. In a very real sense, your attention is not focused
where it should be because your mind is on something else; your mind
is literally "absent." Two conditions have been found to promote absentminded actions, and attention plays an important role in both of them.
You are likely to experience absentmindedness when either of the
following conditions exists: Your actions are part of a habitual^ wellestablished routine or occur in a familiar environment so that continued
attention or vigilance is not required, or you are distracted by, or
preoccupied with, something other than your actions so that your
attention is diverted away from what you are doing.
One book describing research on absentmindedness concludes by
noting that the authors have no prescriptions for how to avoid absentminded errors, because there are no simple remedies. Absentmindedness is the price we pay for being able to carry out so many complex
activities with only a small investment of conscious attention, and we
must accept the usually trivial consequences. The authors felt that the
best they could do was to indicate the kind of circumstances where such
slips are most likely to occur.2 However, the situation might not be quite
as hopeless as that. Although we might not be able to completely
eliminate problems of absentmindedness, there are some things we can
do that can help alleviate the problems.

Using Mnemonics: Absentmindedness

and Education

205

When we talk about absentmindedness, we need to distinguish
between two kinds of remembering—prospective and retrospective.
Prospective memory concerns memory for future events in the form of
actions that you intend to take in the future; it might be viewed as
"remembering to remember." Retrospective memory concerns memory
for past events, things we have learned in the past. For example, suppose
you take a telephone message for a fellow office worker or family
member. When that person returns, you need to remember to give him
the message; that is prospective remembering. If he reminds you to give
him the message by asking if there were any calls for him while he was
out, then you need to remember what the message was; that is
retrospective remembering.
PROSPECTIVE REMEMBERING
When people complain about being absentminded, or losing their memory, or having memory lapses, they are often more concerned with their
failure to remember to do something they intended to do than with their
failure to retrieve stored information from the past. When a person
forgets something he has learned in the past, we say that his memory is
unreliable, but when he forgets to do something he said he would do
then we say that he is unreliable. Memory for intended actions is what
makes an efficient, well-organized person.
A useful distinction may be drawn between two kinds of prospective
memory. Habitual remembering involves things that we do on a regular
basis, such as brushing our teeth or taking our daily vitamin pills. Episodic
remembering involves things we do only occasionally or irregularly, such
as picking up a loaf of bread, mailing a letter, or making a phone call.
One strategy for handling problems with habitual remembering is to
incorporate the intended action in the regular stream of daily activities.
For example, you could take your pill (which you might forget) each
morning just before you eat breakfast (which you will not forget). Of
course, the more routine you have in your life, the more effective this
strategy will be. People who lead organized lives tend to notice fewer
memory lapses in habitual remembering, because structure supplements—or even replaces—memory. One reason why some elderly
people report fewer memory lapses than young adults is because many
elderly are more reliant on a regular daily routine.3 When the elderly do
report more memory lapses, it is often because they were out of their
normal routine or they had not used that information recently. Most
reported problems for younger adults occur when they are under stress.4

206

YOUR MEMORY

Although habitual remembering can cause problems, most people
have many more problems with episodic remembering than they do with
habitual remembering. The wife may forget to tell her husband about an
important phone call he needs to return or an appointment with the
doctor; the husband may forget to mail a letter or may forget an
anniversary; the student may forget to take a certain book to school or
to take lunch money.
One way to remember intended actions is to make a list of what you
need to do, either written in a notebook or filed mentally as described
for the Loci and Phonetic systems. This method requires you to remember to look at the listfrequentlyand regularly. Another way to help in
remembering episodic intentions is to visualize some act or object that is
related to the intended action, and associate it with the intended action.
The wife may picture her husband coming home with a phone hanging
around his neck; the husband may picture himself sitting on top of the
mailbox that is next to his bus stop; the student may picture herself
eating her breakfast out of her book. Then, when the wife sees the
husband come in the door, the husband sees the mailbox by the bus
stop, and the student sees her breakfast, they are more likely to
remember the intended actions.
A simple example of my own use of this visual association technique
occurred once while I was jogging around the track and remembered I
needed to make a phone call concerning a piano. I could not make the
call then or write a note to remind myself to do it so I pictured a piano
sitting in my office. When I finished running and returned to my office, I
thought of the piano as soon as I opened the door, and I made the phone
caH.
One woman reported that she often imagines a Dr. Suess type of
household pet, a nine-foot Gleech, with bathmat ears and multicolored
mink tail. When she must remember to do something, she pictures him
doing it. For example, he may be at the telephone calling the rug cleaner.
Later, when she calls him to mind, she sees him there and that reminds
her of what she should be doing.5
External Reminders
Another technique that helps some people remember to perform intended actions is to make a physical change in their environment to cue
them to remember the action. This is an external memory aid rather
than an internal memory aid. Studies have found that in everyday life
most people,fromchildren through elderly adults, use external aids such
as lists, memos to themselves, appointment books, timers and alarms,

Using Mnemonics: Absentmindedness

and Education

207

and physical changes in their environment, more than they use internal
aids such as imagery, association, rhymes, acronyms, and mnemonic
systems. For example, in one study elderly people reported using
memory aids more often than did young adults, but the two groups were
similar in the kinds of memory aids they used: External aids outnumbered internal aids by a ratio of about two to one.6
In research on the effectiveness of external aids in prospective
remembering, people are typically given a set of addressed postcards or
envelopes to mail on specified dates, or assignments to make phone calls
at specified times. Most people use some kind of external memory aid,
such as circling dates on the calendar to indicate when to mail the cards
or putting the cards in a place that is frequently looked at like a bulletin
board or dresser top. Several studies on remembering such "appointments" have found that the elderly remembered as well as young adults
did. One study suggested that failure to do something on time (mail an
envelope) is not always a failure in prospective memory—people previously identified as high procrastinators were late more than were low
procrastinators.7
I suggested earlier that one reason why some elderly people report
fewer memory lapses may be because their lives are more routine and
organized; another reason the researchers suggested, is that the elderly
may make more use of external aids. External aids may be necessary if
you are very busy, if you become engrossed in something else, or if you
might be distracted by unexpected events. One of the problems in
prospective remembering is that you might remember several times
during the day that you need to mail a letter or make a phone call, but
not at a time when you can do it.
Carrying out an intended action is not only a matter of remembering
to do it but also of remembering to do it
Suppose that
just before you left the house for work you thought of a phone call you
needed to make or a book you needed to take; you could make the call
or grab the book, and you would be glad you "remembered." But if you
thought of them a few minutes later while driving down the street, you
would complain about "forgetting." Thus,
and
we remember
can be as important as
we remember. We often need something
to cue us, to call our attention to the intended action so that we are
reminded to remember at the right time. Special cuing devices have even
been developed for this purpose, such as special alarms and timers
combined with visual or spoken messages.8
A straightforward example of a physical reminder is to put a book
by the door so that you will remember to take it back to the library the
next time you go out, or to hang your coat on the doorknob so that you

at the right time.

whether

when

where

208

YOUR MEMORY

will remember to take it to the cleaners. A similar method is to make a

symbolic change in the environment to cue yourself, a change that is not

directly related to the intended action. The well-known example of the
string around the finger illustrates this strategy. The string is intended
to remind you that there is something you need to remember, and the
novelty of the string will usually serve that purpose (unless, of course,
you normally wear a string around your finger). If you want to be less
conspicuous than having a string around your finger, you might put a
rubber band on your wrist, move your watch to the other wrist, move a
ring to a different finger, turn your ring around so that the stone faces
the palm, or put your keys in a different pocket. All of these changes
serve to cue you that you need to remember something.
This strategy of symbolic reminders can also be used for the times
when you remember at night (as you are trying to get to sleep)
something that you need to do in the morning, and then in the morning
you cannot remember what it was, or maybe do not even remember that
you needed to remember something. A helpful technique is to reach over
and turn your alarm clock on end, throw a book on the floor, or turn the
radio around—something that you will notice in the morning. When you
get up the next morning, you will see the thing that is out of place and
be reminded that there is something you need to remember. I use this
strategy sometimes when I turn my car lights on and do not want to
forget to turn them off after parking. To remind me to turn them off
before getting out of the car, I hang something (for example, a glove) on
the door handle. When I park the car and reach for the handle to open
the door, I am reminded to turn off the lights.
There is one limitation of these symbolic physical reminders. They
do help you remember that you wanted to remember something, and
thus start the search for retrieval, but they do not help you directly
remember
it was you wanted to remember. Is the string around
your finger to remind you to buy some string? Is the book lying in the
middle of the floor to remind you to take it back to the library? Is the
glove on the door handle to remind you to put on your gloves?
If you are concerned about remembering what it is you wanted to
remember, an additional step that will make the symbolic external
reminders more effective is to add an internal aid: Associate the physical
change with the intended action. If the string on yourfingeris to remind
you to mail a letter, you might picture yourself dropping string in the
mailbox. If the book on theflooris to remind you to leave a note for the
milkman, you might picture yourself stuffing the book into a milk bottle.
If the watch on the wrong wrist is to remind you to make a phone call,
you might picture yourself calling the person on your watch.
Actually, most of the time you will find that remembering what you

what

Using Mnemonics: Absentmindedness

and Education

209

wanted to remember is not a problem: As long as there is a cue to
remind you that you need to remember something, your natural memory
will usually tell you what it is you needed to remember. For example, in
one study with six- and eight-year-old children the researcher sat a toy
clown out where the children could see it, to remind them to have him
open a "surprise box" for them at the end of the research session. About
three-fourths of the children reminded him to open the box when the
clown was out, as compared with only about half the children when the
clown was not out.9
RETROSPECTIVE REMEMBERING
Almost all memory research (and almost all of this book) deals with
retrospective memory: You do not need to remember to remember
because the researcher tells you when it is time to recall the word list,
or the teacher asks you a question or gives you the exam. Someone
prompts you to recall. (This is different from "cued" or "aided" recall,
where you are given a cue as to what you are to remember rather than
when to remember.)
Some kinds of absentmindedness involve retrospective memory.
Retrospective absentmindedness differsfrom-the kinds of retrospective
memory that have been the subject of most research in that it deals with
memory for our own actions rather than memory for other information.
It also differs from prospective memory in that research has been
conducted on using imagery in retrospective memory more than in
prospective memory (where, as we have seen, external aids are used
more often than internal aids).10
One common kind of retrospective absentmindedness is forgetting
whether you did something, such as turn off the lights when you left the
house or lock all the doors before going to bed. Part of the problem in
remembering such past actions is that you might have thought about
doing it, and later cannot remember whether you actually did it or just
thought about it. This is a normal experience. Some people are "checkers," having to continually check to confirm that a task has been
completed. In its extreme form, continuous checking is a compulsive
disorder, but in milder forms it also is very common among normal
people.11
Another kind of retrospective absentmindedness is forgetting where
we put something, such as our umbrella or car keys, or even the car
itself. (Have you ever driven to a big concert or sports event, parked
your car, and then after the event, as you looked over the thousands of
cars, you could not remember where yours was?)
As I noted in chapter 4, a major cause of these kinds of retrospective

210

YOUR MEMORY

absentmindedness lies in the principle of attention. You were probably
not consciously paying attention to what you were doing at the time you
turned off the lights, locked the doors, set down your car keys, or
parked the car. Your mind was on something else. Thus, one way to
overcome these two kinds of absentmindedness (forgetting whether you
did something or where you put something) is to do something to focus
your attention on what you are doing. You might tell yourself as you
leave the house, "I am locking the door," or as you park the car, "I am
parking the car in the far northeast corner of the lot," or as you put
down the keys, "I am putting the keys on the refrigerator." It only takes
a fraction of a second to think this to yourself, and your attention is
focused on what you are doing; thus, there is a greater likelihood that
you will later be able to remember having done it. In addition, it may
help to actually form a mental picture of the car keys on the refrigerator.
One student in my memory class had a particular problem with
forgetting where she put her car keys. She was often rounding up her
roommates in search groups to help her hunt for her keys. She tried this
technique of telling herself whenever she put her keys down, only she
went one step further. She told herself
where she was putting
them. She reported that it almost drove her roommates crazy, but she
did not have any trouble remembering where her keys were (nor did her
roommates, and they did not even particularly want to know!).
If you did not pay attention to what you were doing at the time you
did it, there is a strategy that can help overcome retrospective absentmindedness at the retrieval stage (rather than at the recording stage).
Mentally retrace your steps. Go back in your mind and think about what
you were doing that led up to the act you are trying to remember; it
might help you remember whether you did the specific action or where
you put the item. This technique, which is similar to "thinking around it"
in chapter 4, was the mostfrequentlyused internal memory aid reported
in a survey of college students and housewives in England; nearly
everyone had used it at least once, and about 30 percent of them had
used it more than once a week.12
For most people retrospective absentmindedness is just an inconvenience. But for urban elderly people such forgetfulness can endanger
not only their well-being but also their safety: It may be
to
misplace eyeglasses, but in a big city it is
to leavefrontdoors
unlocked. A memory course for people over age seventy in the Bronx in
New York City taught them the techniques in this chapter for overcoming
absentmindedness, and helped them reduce their problems of losing
things (eyeglasses, keys, canes, gloves, money) and of forgetting to lock
their doors. The imagery techniques were most successful with people

out loud

dangerous

annoying

Using Mnemonics: Absentmindedness

and Education

211

whose memories were more intact, whereas habit and repetition helped
those people with serious memory deficits.13
Another kind of absentmindedness that is a source of irritation to
many people is going into another room to get something or do something, and then forgetting why you are there. This is one memory lapse
that can make people feel like they are really losing their minds, and thus
we can take some comfort in knowing that it also is a common experience
for many people. A national Roper survey found that 9 of 10 people
admitted to having faulty memories, and that the most common lapse
was going into a room and forgetting what they went in there for
(reported by 59 percent of those surveyed).14 Again, the most likely
cause of this problem is failure to pay sufficient attention to what you are
doing. Often you just have a passing thought enter your mind of something you need to do in the other room, and before you mentally grab
the thought you start moving into the other room as your mind moves
on to other things. If you stop and concentrate for just a second on the
thought and actually tell yourself why you are going into the other room
before you go, you are more likely to remember why you are there
when you get there. Also, it may be of additional help to briefly picture
yourself doing what you intend to do when you get there.
Association is another principle that can play an important role in
the "other room" kind of absentmindedness. Sometimes when you find
yourself in the other room wondering why you are there, you have
probably looked around the room to see if there is something that will
remind you of why you are there (because it may be associated with
your errand). If that does not work, you might try going back to doing
what you were doing at the time youfirstthought of going to the room.
Suppose, for example, you were standing at the kitchen sink having a
drink of water just before you went in the other room; go back to the
sink and pick up your water again. Often this will remind you of what you
needed to do, because the thought became associated with what you
were doing when the thought came to you. Sometimes it can even help
to mentally (rather than physically) go back and think of what you were
doing when you first thought of going to the room. This strategy is
similar to mentally retracing your steps to remember whether you did
something or where you put something.
MNEMONICS IN EDUCATION
In addition to overcoming absentmindedness, memory aids can have
practical value in schoolwork. We saw in chapter 8 that research on
mnemonics began in the 1960s. By the early 1970s, several psychologists

212

YOUR MEMORY

and researchers had suggested the potential value of mnemonics in
education. Psychologists and researchers have continued to encourage
educational applications of mnemonics in the 1980s. A book for high
school teachers on how to teach study skills suggests that "mnemonic
devices should not be scorned by study skills teachers. Too many of
them have proved effective for students through the centuries and are
still being used by successful students." One psychologist has listed 10
reasons why mnemonic techniques can and should be taught in the
schools, and supported them with research evidence. A few of the
reasons were: Mnemonics are versatile; mnemonics are time efficient;
mnemonics are adaptable to student differences; and most children enjoy
using mnemonics.15
A great amount of research published since the late 1970s has
shown that mnemonics can help in the kinds of memory tasks required
in school. Much of this research has been described in previous chapters
and additional research is described in many recent review articles.16
Examples of specific subjects that mnemonics have been found to help
are spelling, foreign language vocabulary (concrete nouns, abstract
nouns, verbs), English vocabulary words and definitions, states and
capitals, people's names and their accomplishments, medical terms,
reading, properties of minerals, the hardness scale of minerals, cities
and their products, and U.S. presidents. Memory-training books give
specific examples of how mnemonics could also be applied to many other
school subjects.17
Much of this research on mnemonics in school has used the Keyword
mnemonic, and has provided mnemonic pictures (rather than using selfgenerated mental images) to represent verbal material. The research
has been done on material in textbook prose form as well as in list form,
and has involved many different kinds of student of all ages.
Mnemonics have been found to benefit good students as well as
poor students. Even gifted students in elementary school, as young as
fourth graders, have improved their learning by using imagery mnemonics that they have been taught, although they already spontaneously use
more elaborate and effective learning strategies than their peers. In fact,
gifted students may benefit even more from mnemonics than other
students do.18
One of the conclusions stated in the U.S. Department of Education
book
is: "Mnemonics help students remember more information faster and retain it longer." Mnemonics that can be used in school
have also been summarized from the teachers' perspective as well as
that of the students.19
Extensive mnemonic programs based on stories, rhymes, and songs

What Works

Using Mnemonics: Absentmindedness and Education

213

have been developed and used by a Japanese educator, Masachika
Nakane, for learning mathematics (arithmetic, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, and calculus), science (chemistry, physics, and biology), spelling and grammar, and the English language. Japanese children as young
as kindergarten have used these mnemonics to perform mathematical
operations with fractions, to solve algebraic problems (including the use
of the quadratic formula), to do elementary calculus, to generate formulas
for chemical compounds and diagram their molecular structure, and to
learn English.
Some of Nakane's mnemonics for adding, subtracting, multiplying,
and dividing fractions have been adapted for use in the United States.
One study found that third-grade children using these mnemonics learned
all the mathematical operations withfractionsin 3 hours as well as sixthgrade students had learned them in three years of traditional instruction,
I also used these mnemonics to teach my son all the operations with
fractions when he was still in the second grade (after he learned his
times tables as described in chapter 12). Extensive mnemonic programs
have also been developed in the United States for such areas as reading,
spelling, grammar, and basic mathematics skills.20
We have seen many examples in previous chapters of ways my
memory students have used mnemonics in their schoolwork. Several
college students who have taken my memory course as juniors or seniors
have commented that they wished they had taken the course when they
were freshmen, because it would have done them more good in school.
Also, many of my students, especially older students who have children
of their own, have expressed their wish that these techniques were
taught in school before college. One father who expressed such a wish
wrote the following:

Today I sent an eight-year-old daughter to school feeling better about her chances
of passing an exam on presidents of the United States. When I read such
questions as which one liked fancy clothes or who formed the rough riders, I
could see why Karen was upset. There were 50 such associations and she was
ready to give up. It became a family project and everyone began to give ideas of
associations. We could see the fancy clothes neatly packed in a chest of drawers
(Chester Arthur). A teddy bear on a rough riding horse became Teddy Roosevelt.
This could have been a situation that made Karen feel very inadequate but it
turned into a fun session for the entire family.
I don't know how well she did on the test, but I do know that she will do
better just because of her self-image improvement. . . . The rote learning that
she had to do could have developed a thought pattern or a contorted self-image
that could have been a negative experience that could stay with her for years.

214

YOUR MEMORY

. . . Karen just came home from school with an 88 percent on her presidents
exam. She certainly is a happier, more confident little girl than she was last night.
In light of all the research support and other supportive evidence,
you might think that there would be a trend toward teaching mnemonics
in school, but this has not happened as much as the research might seem
to justify. Mnemonics are not taught in most schools at any level. In fact,
this is not only limited to mnemonics but is also true of other learning
and memory strategies in this book. Explicit instruction in any strategies
for effective thinking and learning rarely occur in the classroom.21
Two extensive programs on learning at the college level have been
well researched and described at Texas Christian University and at the
University of Texas at Austin. Both deal with learning how to learn,
including mnemonics and other learning strategies in this book, and have
been quite successful. There are also a few similar programs in other
school districts below the college level, but generally little is taught at
any school level about how to learn more effectively.22
It is strange that we expect students to learn, solve problems, and
remember a lot of material, but we seldom teach them how to learn,
solve problems, and remember. It is time to make up for this lack by
developing applied courses in learning, problem solving, and memory,
and by incorporating them in the academic curriculum. This was the
justification that was given for including a chapter on learning strategies
in a recent book on effective teaching.23
There are many obstacles to incorporating any kind of educational
research into schools.24 One reason why mnemonics are not taught more
frequently in schools may be that many educators are not aware of the
recent research showing how and why mnemonics could be used. A
second reason probably lies in the pseudo-limitations discussed in chapter
8. Two psychologists who have done extensive research on memory have
called these pseudo-limitations "the persisting nemesis" of mnemonic
techniques in the classroom because, they said, as history has consistently shown with respect to most avenues of change, it takes far more
than fact to combat the fiction of firmly entrenched personal philosophies.25
Although several of the pseudo-limitations have been espoused by
many educators, the one that is probably most significant in preventing
the teaching and using of mnemonics in schools is the one involving
mnemonics and understanding.26 Many educators feel mnemonics are
not relevant to school subjects because most mnemonics help with
learning and remembering more than they do with understanding and
comprehending. To better understand this point, let us examine the role

Using Mnemonics: Absentmindedness

and Education

215

of memory in education (also see the section "Mnemonics Do Not Aid
Understanding" in chapter 8).
MEMORY IN EDUCATION
Memorization is a low-level mental skill to many educators, so they
usually state the purposes of education in terms of loftier goals than
remembering, such as understanding and applying principles, critical and
creative blinking, reasoning, and synthesizing. (You may often hear
disparaging remarks about mere memorizing, but how often have you
heard someone speak of "mere" understanding or "mere" creativity?)
As one review of memory research observed, some educators "give the
impression that they regard memory proficiency as antithetical to academic excellence, feeling that memorization interferes with the operation
of more laudable, higher mental processes." The reviewers suggested
that such misconceptions must be dispelled for research on memory to
make a positive contribution to educational practice.27
Two points may be made regarding the role of memory relative to
the loftier goals or "more laudable, higher mental processes" in school.
First, whether we like it or not there is a lot of straight memory work in
school. Education consists of "basic school tasks" involving list and
paired-associate learning, as well as "complex school tasks" like meaningful prose learning. One history teacher argued that memory was
unimportant in education today; then at an early class period he told his
students that for a test they must list the U.S. presidents and their
terms in office. ("You must all know the presidents in chronological
order, and the dates, before the end of this term.") Psychologist Gordon
Bower observed that the loftier educational goals are usually only extra
requirements beyond the learning of basic facts that is demanded as a
minimum standard.
Any geography student who thinks Istanbul is in France, or any art history
student who thinks Salvador Dali painted the Sistine Chapel, is going toflunkhis
exams if he pulls such boners often enough. The point is that we do demand that
students learn a lot of facts just as we are constantly required to do in our daily
life. . . .»
The fact is that the loftier educational goals are in addition to, not
instead of, memorization. One analysis of the goals of education divided

general thinking and learning skills into three areas—knowledge acquisition (including memory aids and study techniques), problem solving, and
reasoning. An analysis of the process of education viewed learning in

216

YOUR MEMORY

terms of stages. In the early stages we acquire a number of relatively
disparate pieces of information (the "basic facts" stressed in most
classrooms). Mnemonics or other learning strategies may facilitate such
learning by providing the "conceptual glue" necessary to hold these
disparate pieces in memory. As a person begins to fit the pieces
together, mnemonics may play a less important (or different) role, and
other factors may be more important. Still later, when the performance
is well established, mnemonics may have little or no effect on learning
since the underlying knowledge structure now holds the information
together in some meaningful, integrated whole. Both of these analyses
include remembering facts as a significant part of the big picture, and
both view mnemonics as playing a role in that part.29
Anyone who is a student in school, or can remember when he was,
knows that success on exams depends heavily on remembering facts. I
asked 33 college freshmen and 24 upperclassmen from many different
majors to rate how important memorization was as compared with the
"higher thinking skills (understanding, reasoning, critical and creative
thinking, synthesizing, etc.)" in determining their exam scores in high
school and in college. For their eXams in high school, 76 percent of the
freshman and 96 percent of the upperclassmen rated memorization as
being of equal or greater importance than the higher thinking skills. Even
for their college exams, half of the students (49 percent of the freshmen
and 50 percent of the upperclassmen) still rated memorization as being
of equal or greater importance. Whatever lofty goals teachers may
espouse, or may think that they are testing, students still see memory
as playing a significant role in their school success.
Memorizing the necessary routine things more efficiently may help
to free our minds so that we can spend more time on the so-called loftier
tasks. After his above observation that much of schoolwork is straight
memory work, Bower went on to say:
But the solution to the problem is probably at hand. By systematically applying
the knowledge that we now have about learning, we should be able to improve
our skills so that we spend less time memorizing facts. By the strategic use of
mnemonics, we might free ourselves for those tasks we consider more important
than memorization.
The second point regarding the role of memory in education is that
remembered facts serve as the basis for the loftier goals. One review of
memory research began with this statement: "It is hard to think of any
educational goal for which the ability to retain information is unimportant;
human memory is crucial for acquiring the knowledge and skills we learn

Using Mnemonics: Absentmindedness

and Education

217

at school." In one study, students who took a comprehension test on a
passage from memory did better than students who could refer to the
passage while taking the test. The researchers suggested that memorizing individual facts may be a necessary precursor to a thorough understanding of the relations among the facts. Similarly, learning-disabled
adolescents who learned attributes of minerals using mnemonic pictures
were better able to make inferences about the attributes than were
students taught the traditional way, even though such information was
never explicitly presented in the lesson.30
Other researchers have also suggested that tasks involving reasoning and understanding still require that you remember the facts in order
to be able to reason with them and understand them, and that one reason
why mnemonics may help in acquiring concepts is that they reduce the
memory load for the facts that are necessary for understanding the
concept. In fact, one book on clear thinking even defined thinking as "the
manipulation of memories. "31
Memory also plays an important role in decision making and problem
solving. Studies of problem solving in such areas as engineering, computer programming, social science, reading comprehension, physics,
medical diagnosis, and mathematics have shown that effective problem
solving depends strongly on the nature and organization of the knowledge
available to the individuals. Mnemonics have even been conceptualized as
problem-solving techniques for solving some memory problems.32
One of the conclusions contained in
is that ". . .
memorizing can help students absorb and retain the factual information
on which understanding and critical thought are based." The conclusion
is explained further:

What Works

Memorizing simplifies the process of recalling information and allows its use to
become automatic. Understanding and critical thought can then build on, this base
of knowledge and fact. Indeed, the more sophisticated mental operations of
analysis, synthesis, and evaluation are impossible without rapid and accurate
recall of bodies of specific knowledge.33
Thus, we have seen that even if we state the goals of education as
going beyond "mere memorization" to understanding, reasoning, and
problem solving, mnemonics can still help in school for at least two
reasons: Many schoolwork tasks involve memorization, so memorizing
these tasks more efficiently will free us to spend more time and effort
on the advanced goals, and these memorized facts serve as the basis for
achieving the more advanced goals.

Appendix: Keywords for the
Phonetic System

The following list consists of several keywords for each number from 00
to 09 and from 0 to 100. These keywords are based on the Phonetic
system (see chapter 12) and can be used in at least two ways. First, you
can select a keyword for each number from 1 to 100 that will be
meaningful and memorable to you, constructing a mental filing system
for memorizing 100 items. Second, you can reduce forgetting caused by
interference among different numbers that have the same pairs of digits
in them by using a different keyword each time a pair of digits is repeated.
For example, there will be less interference among the phone numbers
3905, 0542, and 4239 if they are remembered by
and
than if they are remembered by
and

mop-sail, seal-rain,
mop-sail, sail-rain,

horn-map
rain-mop.
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09

sauce zoos hoses seas seesaw oasis icehouse Zeus Seuss
suit seed sod seat soot waste waist city soda stew acid
sun scene zone sin snow swine swan
sum zoom Siam swim seam asthma
sore soar seer sewer sower hosiery czar
sail seal sale sly slow sleigh soil soul
sash sage switch siege
sack sock sick hassock ski sky whisky squaw
safe sieve sofa housewife
soap sub spy wasp asp soup subway
219

220

238 APPENDIX: KEYWORDS FOR THE PHONETIC SYSTEM

0 hose sew sow saw house 200 sea ace ice
1 tie tee tea hat head doe toe toy wheat dye hood auto weed
hen Noah hone inn honey gnu wine hyena
3 ma ham hem hymn aim home mow
4 rye ray hair hare row oar arrow ore wire
5 hole law hill hall heel owl eel ale whale awl halo hell wheel
6 shoe hash hedge ash witch show jaw jay wash
/
cow hog key hook cue echo hawk egg hockey oak wig
8 ivy hoof hive wave wife waif
9 bee pie hub hoop ape pea boy bay buoy oboe whip
10 toes dice heads woods toys daisy
11 tot date dot diet toad tide tattoo teeth
12 tin dune dean heathen dawn down twine
13 tomb dome team tummy dam atom autumn dime thumb
14 tire door tray tree deer tar tower dairy heater water waiter
15 towel doll tool dial hotel tail tile duel huddle Italy idol outlaw
16 dish dash tissue
17 tack dock deck duck dog toga twig dike attic
18 dove dive taffy TV thief
19 tub tape dope deb tube depot
20 nose news henhouse noose knees
21 net nut knot hunt window wand wind knight nude ant aunt
22 nun noon onion noun
23 gnome name enemy
24 Nero winner Henry wiener winery
25 nail kneel Nellie Nile
26 notch Nash winch hinge niche wench
27 hanky nag neck nick wink ink Inca
28 knave knife Navy nephew envoy
29 knob honeybee nap
30 mice mouse moose moss maze hams Messiah mass mess
31 mat mitt meat mate mud moth mouth maid meadow moat
32 moon man mane money mine woman human
33 Miami mom mummy mama mime
34 mayor mower moor hammer myrrh
35 mail mule male meal mole mill mall
36 match mooch mush mesh image
37 mug mike hammock
38 muff movie
39 mop map mob amoeba imp
40 rosericehorse rays ears race hearse warehouse iris
41 rot road heart wart rod reed yard radio rut art earth herd wreath

2

221 Appendix: Keywords for the Phonetic System

42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83

ram ruin heron horn Rhine iron urn
ram room harem worm rum arm army Rome
rower roar rear error harrier warrior aurora
roll rail reel role rule railway
roach rouge rash ridge rich raja Russia arch
rock rake rag rack rug arc ark
roof reef wharf
harp rope rib robe rabbi herb ruby
hails hills lace louse lice lassoe walls halls
lot lead loot hailed light wallet lady eyelid lid
line loon lion lane lawn
loom lime helm lamb llama limb elm
lyre lair lure leer lawyer
lily lolly Lulu
ledge leech latch lodge
log lake lock leak leg elk
loaf elf lava leaf wolf
lip lab lap loop lobby alp elbow
hedges cheese juice shoes chaise chess ashes
sheet chute jet washed jade shade shadow shed
chin gin jean gene chain ocean China
gem gym jam chum chime
shore jar cheer chair jury shower sherry usher washer
jewel jail Jell-0 shale chili shawl jelly
hashish judge choo-choo
jack jug shock jock chalk check sheik jockey chick
chef chief shave shove java Chevy chaff
ship shop chop job jab sheep jeep chip
case gas hogs wigs wicks wax ox goose cows ax kiss gauze
cat coat goat cod kid gate cot kite caddie act
Cain cane can coin gown gun wagon coon queen canoe
comb game gum cam comma coma
car core gear cry choir crow
coal coil goal gill gale keel quail eagle ghoul glue
cage cash gauge couch coach
cake cook gag cog keg cock
calf gaff cuff cave coffee cove
cab hiccup cup cap cape cob gob coop cube cub
face fez fuse hoofs waves hives wives vase office
feed food feet foot vote photo
vein fin fan vane van oven heaven phone vine fawn
foam fame fume vim

222

APPENDIX: K E Y W O R D S FOR THE PHONETIC SYSTEM

84 fire weaver wafer fry heifer fur fairyfirivory
85 veilflyfillyveal foal fowl foilfluefleavalley
86 fudgefishvoyage effigy
87 fig fogfakehavoc
88 fife five
89 fobfibfop VIP
90 pies bees bows boys peas base bus pizza abyss
91 beat pot pad bead pit boot boat path bat poet bed body
92 pin bean bun bone pan pine pane pony piano pen penny pawn
93 bomb boom beam bum poem puma opium
94 boar pear pray beer pier bar berry opera
95 bill bowl bell pile pill plow apple pail ball pillow bull eyeball
96 peach patch beach pitch bush page badge
97 bag bug peg pig back pack pick puck book beak bouquet
98 pave puff beef beehive buff
99 baby pipe pop Pope puppy papa
100 disease thesis doses diocese daisies

Chapter Notes

Each time a source is cited after the first time, it is identified by the last
name of the author and the chapter and reference number where it was
first cited. For example, "Hunter (1/5)" in chapter 1, reference 9, means
that this is the same source originally cited in chapter 1, reference 5.
CHAPTER

1

1. F. I. M. Craik, "Paradigms in Human Memory Research," in perspectives on
Learning and Memory, ed. L. NilssonandT. Archer (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1985),
200.

2. M. K. Johnson and L. Hasher, "Human Learning and Memory," in Annual
Review of Psychology vol. 38, ed. M. R. Rosenzweig and L. W. Porter (Palo Alto,
Calif.: Annual Reviews, Inc., 1987), 631-68.
3. B. J. Underwood, Attributes of Memory (Glenview, 111.: Scott, Foresman &

Co., 1983).
4. Wechsler—N. Brooks and N. B. Lincoln, "Assessment for Rehabilitation," in
Clinical Management of Memory Problems, ed. B. A. Wilson and N. Moffat (London:
Croom Helm, 1984), 28-45. Nine scales—L. W. Poon, "Differences in Human
Memory With Aging: Nature, Causes, and Clinical Applications," in Handbook of the
Psychology of Aging, 2d ed., ed. J. E. Birren and K. W. Schaie (New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1985), 427-62.
5. I. M. L. Hunter, Memory, rev. ed. (Middlesex, England: Penguin Books
Ltd., 1964), 282-83.
223

224

CHAPTER N O T E S

6. R. F. Carlson, J. P. Kincaid, S. Lance, and T. Hodgson, "Spontaneous Use of
Mnemonics and Grade Point Average,"
92 (1976): 117-22;
B. J. Zimmerman and M. M. Pons, "Development of a Structured Interview for
Assessing Student Use of Self-regulated Learning Strategies,"
23 (1986): 614-28.
7. P. R. Pintrich, D. R. Cross, R. B. Kozman, and W. J. McKeachie, "Instructional Psychology," in Rosenzweig and Porter (1/2, vol. 37, 1986), 611-51; M.
Pressley, J. G. Borkowski, and W. Schneider, "Good Strategy Users Coordinate
Metacognition, Strategy Use, and Knowledge," in
vol.
4, ed. R. Vasta and G. Whitehurst (Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1987), 89-129.
8. Schooling—M.T. Zivian and R. W. Darjes, "Free Recall By In-School and
Out-of-School Adults: Performance and Metamemory,"
19
(1983): 513-20. Habits—G. E. Rice and B. J. F. Meyer, "The Relation of Everyday
Activities of Adults to Their Prose Recall Performance" (paper presented at the
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, April
1986).
9. Hunter (1/5), 14.
10. Sources for this section include'J. E. Birren and W. R. Cunningham,
"Research on the Psychology of Aging: Principles, Concepts and Theory," in Birren
and Schaie (1/4), 3-34; N. Datan, D. Rodeheaver, and F. Hughes, "Adult Development
and Aging," in Rosenzweig and Porter (1/2), 153-80; Poon(l/4); P. Roberts, "Memory
Strategy Instruction with the Elderly: What Should Memory Training Be the Training
of?" in
ed. M. Pressley and J.
R. Levin (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1983), 75-100.
11. S. L. Willis and K. W. Schaie, "Practical Intelligence in Later Adulthood,"

The Journal of Psychology
American Educational

Research Journal

Annals of Child Development,

Developmental Psychology

Cognitive Strategy Research: Psychological Foundations,

in Practical Intelligence: Nature and Origins of Competence in the Everyday World, ed.

R. J. Sternberg and R. K. Wagner (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986),
236-68.
12. Poon (1/4); L. W. Poon, L. Walsh-Sweeney, and J. L. Fozard, "Memory Skill
Training for the Elderly: Salient Issues on the Use of Imagery Mnemonics," in New
ed. L. W. Poon, J. L. Fozard, L. S. Cermak, D.
Arenberg, and L. W. Thompson (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1980), 461-84; C. L.
McEvoy and J. R. Moon, "Assessment and Treatment of Everyday Memory Problems
in the Elderly," in
ed. M.
M. Gruneberg, P. E. Morris, and R. N. Sykes (Chichester, England: Wiley, in press
1988).
13. M. Pressley and C. J. Brainerd,
(New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985);
H. S. Waters and C. Andreassen, "Children's Use of Memory Strategies under
Instruction," in Pressley and Levin (1/10).
14. First example—S. Witt,
(West Nyack, N. Y.:
Parker Publishing Co., 1983), 7. Second example—L. Belliston and C. Mayfield,
(Woodland Hills, Utah: SB Publishers, 1983), 10.
15. W. James,
vol. 1 (New York: Henry Holt & Co.,
1890). Twelve-year-olds—S. A. Mednick, H. R. Pollio, and E. F. Loftus,
2d ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1973), 131. College students—K. A.

Directions in Memory and Aging,

Practical Aspects of Memory: Current Research and Issues,

Cognitive Learning and Memory in Children: Progress in Cognitive Development Research
How to Be Twice as Smart

Speed Learning, Super Recall
Principles of Psychology,

Learning,

Chapter Notes

225

American Scientist
Learning Theories
How to Develop a Super-Power Memory

Ericsson and W. G. Chase, "Exceptional Memory,"
70 (1982):
607-15.
16. For more discussion of mental discipline see M. L. Biggs,
4th ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1982), 24-33, 256-59.
17. H.. Lorayne,
(New York: New
American Library, 1974, originally published in 1957), 138.
18. The sources of the three quotes are, respectively, R. L. Montgomery,
(New York: AMOCOM, 1981), 11; Belliston and Mayfield (1/14),
10; and Witt (1/14), 4.
19. 4 percent—C. Rose,
(England: Topaz Publishing Ltd.,
1985), 5. 1 percent—T. Buzan,
(New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1984), 13.
20. Rose (1/19), 26.
21. Witt (1/14), 4.

for Teachers,

Memory Made Easy

Accelerated Learning
Making the Most of Your Mind

CHAPTER

2

1. R. J. Baron, The Cerebral Computer: An Introduction to the Computational
Structure of the Human Brain (Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1987).
2. Pintrich et al. (1/7).
3. A. Baddeley, Your Memory: A User's Guide (New York: MacMillan, 1982); V.
H. Gregg, Introduction to Human Memory (London: Routledge and Kegan Patfl,
1986); E. Loftus, Memory (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1980); L. Stern, The
Structures and Strategies of Human Memory (Homewood, IU.: Dorsey Press, 1985);
A. Wingfield and D. L. Byrnes, The Psychology of Human Memory (New York:
Academic Press, 1981); E. B. Zechmeister and S. E. Nyberg, Human Memory: An
Introduction to Research and Theory (Monterey, Calif.: Brooks/Cole, 1982).
4. P. Muter, "Very Rapid Forgetting," Memory & Cognition 8 (1980): 174-79.
5. J. J. Watkins and T. M. Graefe, "Delayed Rehearsal of Pictures," Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 20 (1981): 276-88.
6. R. F. Schilling and G. E. Weaver, "Effects of Extraneous Verbal Information
on Memory for Telephone Numbers," Journal of Applied Psychology 68 (1983): 55964.

7. Elderly—Poon (1/4); Oriental cultures versus Western cultures—B. Yu, W.
Chang, Q. Jing, R. Peng, G. Zhang, and H. A. Simon, "STM Capacity for Chinese
and English Language Materials,"Memory
13 (1983): 202-07.
8. H. A. Simon, "How Big Is a Chunk?"
183 (1974): 482-88.
9. D. H. Holding,
(Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum,
1985). J. D. Milojkovic, "Chess Imagery in Novice and Master,"
6 (1982): 125-44.
10. K. A. Ericsson and H. A. Simon,
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1984).
11. R. R. Bootzin, G. H. Bower, R. B. Zajonc, and E. Hall,
6th ed. (New York: Random House, 1986), 222,
12. W. F. Brewer and J. R. Pani, "The Structure of Human Memory," in The

& Cognition
Science
The Psychology of Chess Skill

Imagery

Journal of Mental
Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data
Psychology Tbday:

An Introduction,
Psychology ofLearning and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory, vol. 17, ed.

CHAPTER N O T E S

226

G. H. Bower (New York: Academic Press, 1983), 1-38; E. Halving, "How Many
Memory Systems Are There?"
40 (1985): 385-98.
13. w. Penfield,
(Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1975). Some psychologists have argued that such evidence does not necessarily prove that all memories are permanent. See E. Loftus and G. Loftus, "On the
Permanence of Stored Information in the Human Brain,"
35
(1980): 409-20; but compare M. B. Arnold,
(Hillsdale, N. J.:
Erlbaum, 1984), 50-52.
14. For more information about K. F. see T. Shallice and E. K. Warrington,
"Independent Functioning of Verbal Memory Stores: A Neuropsychological Study,"
22 (1970): 261-73. For more information
about H. M. see B. Milner, "Amnesia Following Operation on the Temporal Lobes,"
in
ed. C. W. M. Whitty and O. L. Zangwill (London: Butterworth & Co.,
1966), 109-33.
15. R. L. Klatzky,
2d ed. (San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co., 1980), 88.
16. These are the three most common direct measures of memory, although
there are other direct and indirect measures—Johnson and Hasher (1/2).
17. 600 pairs—R. N. Shepard, "Recognition Memory for Words, Sentences and
6 (1967): 156-63. Performance of the elderly—Poon (1/4).
18. H. P. Bahrick, D. O. Bahrick, and R. P. Wittlinger, "Fifty Years of Memory
for Names and Faces: A Cross-sectional Approach
ogy 104 (1975): 54-75.
19. L. K. Groninger and L. D. Groninger, "A Comparison of Recognition and
Savings as Retrieval Measures: A Reexamination,"
15 (1980): 263-66.
20. H. P. Bahrick, "Memory for People," in
ed. J. E. Harris and P. E. Morris (London: Academic Press,
1984), 19-34.
21. H. E. Burtt, "An Experimental Study of Early Childhood Memory: Final
Report,"
58 (1941): 435-39.
22. D. L. Horton and C. B. Mills, "Human Learning and Memory," in Rosenzweig and Porter (1/2, Vol. 35., 1984), 361-94.
23. G. Reed, "Everyday Anomalies of Recall and Recognition," in
ed. J. F. Kihlstrom and F. J. Evans (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum,
1979), 1-28.
24. Most of the research in this section has been summarized by J. Reason, and
K. Mycielska,
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1982); J. Reason and D. Lucas, "Using
Cognitive Diaries to Investigate Naturally Occurring Memory Blocks," in Harris and
Morris (2/20), 53-70.
25. A. D. Yarmey, "I Recognize Your Face but I Can't Remember Your Name:
Further Evidence on the Tip-of-the-Tongue Phenomenon,"
3
(1973): 287-90; L. T. Kozlowski, "Effects of Distorted Auditory and of Rhyming Cues
on Retrieval of Tip-of-the-Tongue Words by Poets and Nonpoets,"

American Psychologist
The Mystery of the Mind

American Psychologist
Memory and the Brain

Quarterly Journal ofExperimental Psychology
Amnesia,
Human Memory: Structures and Processes,

Pictures," Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior

"Journal ofExperimental Psychol-

Absent-mindedness,

Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society
Everyday Memory, Actions, and

Journal of Genetic Psychology

Disorders of Memory,

Functional

Absent-minded? The Psychology of Mental Lapses and Everyday Errors
Memory & Cognition
Memory & Cogni-

245 Chapter Notes
Hon 5 (1977): 477-81; H. Lawless and T. Engen, "Associations to Odors: Interference, Mnemonics, and Verbal Labeling,"
3 (1977): 52-59.
26. Research—Boon (1/4). Diary—D. Burke, "I'll Never Forget What's His
Name: Aging and the Tip-of-the-Tongue Experience," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12).

Learning and Memory

Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human

CHAPTER

3

1. J. Deese, "On the Prediction of Occurrence of Particular Verbal Intrusions in
Immediate Recall,
58 (1959): 17-22.
2. R. J. Harris, "Inferences in Information Processing," in Bower (2/12, vol. 15,
1981), 82-128.
3. A. Layerson, ed.,
3d ed. (New York:
Random House, Inc., 1985), 111.
4. Syllables-r-H. Ebbinghaus,
(New York: Columbia University Press,
1913. Germany, 1885). Spanish—H. P. Bahrick, "Semantic Memory Context in
Permastore: 50 Years of Memory for Spanish Learned in School,"
113 (1984): 1-29. Drugs, amnesia—P. E. Gold, "Sweet
Memories,"
75 (1987): 151-55.
5. Horton and Mills (2/22).
6. B. J. Underwood, "Forgetting,"
(1964): 91-99.
7. Poetry, Nigeria—J. R. Gentile, N. Monaco, I. E. Iheozor-Ejiofor, A. N. Ndu,
and P. K. Ogbonaya, "Retention by 'Fast' and 'Slow' Learners,"
6 (1982):
125-28. Elderly—Boon (1/4).
8. R. G. Ley, "Cerebral Laterality and Imagery," in
ed. A. A. Sheikh (New York: Wiley, 1983), 252-87; S. P.
Springer and G. Deutsch,
2d ed. (New York: W. H. Freeman,
1985).
9. J. Levy, "Right Brain, Left Brain: Fact and Fiction,"
May
1985, 38-44; K. McKean, "Of Two Minds: Selling the Right Brain,"
April
1985, 30, 34-36, 38, 40; S. P. Springer, "Educating the Left and Right Sides of the
BrainNational
67, no. 2, (1987): 25-28.
10. Alphabet—R. J. Weber and J. Castleman, "The Time It Takes to Imagine,"
8(1970): 165-68. Object—J. M. Clark and A. Paivio, "A
Dual Coding Perspective on Encoding Processes," in
ed. M. A. McDanieland
M. Pressley (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987), 5-33.
11. 2,560 pictures—L. Standing, J. Conezio, and R. N. Haber, "Perception and
Memory for Pictures: Single-trial Learning of 2,500 Visual Stimuli,"
19 (1970): 73-74. 10,000 pictures, recall—L. Standing, ."Learning 10,000
Pictures,"
25 (1973): 207-22. Memory
after three months—D. Homa and C. Viera, "Long-term Memory for Pictures under
Conditions of Difficult Foil Discriminability" (paper presented at the meeting of the
Western Psychological Association, Long Beach, Calif., April 1987).
12. S. Madigan, "Picture Memory," in
ed. J. C. Yuille (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1983), 65-69; D.

"Journal ofExperimental Psychology

Psychology Today: An Introduction,
Memory
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
American Scientist
Scientific American 210
Intelligence
Imagery: Current Theory,
Research, and Application,
Left Brain, Right Brain,
Psychology Today,
Discover,
Forum: The Phi Kappa PhiJournal
Perception and Psychophysks
Imagery and Related Mnemonic
Processes: Theories, Individual Differences, and Applications,

Science

Psychonomic

Quarterly Journal ofExperimental Psychology

in Honor ofAllan Paivio,

Imagery, Memory and Cognition: Essays

CHAPTER N O T E S

228

C. Park, J. T. Puglisi, and M. Sovacool, "Memory for Pictures, Words, and Spatial
Location in Older Adults: Evidence for Pictorial Superiority,"
38 (1983): 582-88; G. H. Ritchey, "Pictorial Detail and Recall in Adults and Children,"
8 (1982): 13941.
13. A. Paivio and K. Csapo, "Picture Superiority in Free Recall: Imagery or
Dual Coding,"
5 (1973): 176-206; D. L. Nelson, "Remembering
Pictures and Words: Appearance, Significance, and Name," in
ed. L. S. Cermak and F. I. M. Craik (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum,
1979).
14. Clark and Paivio (3/10); A. Paivio,
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1986); A. Paivio, "The Empirical Case
for Dual Coding," in Yuille (3/12), 307-32.
15. D. Marks and P. McKellar, "The Nature and Function of Eidetic Imagery,"
6 (1982): 1-28 (commentaries, 28-124); R. N. Haber,
"Twenty Years of Haunting Eidetic Imagery: Where's the Ghost?"
2 (1979): 583-629.
16. C. F. Stromeyer III, "Eidetikers,"
November 1970, 4650.
17. A. R. Luria,
(New York: Basic Books, 1968), 12.
18. 256 digits—J. C. Horn, "Ah Yes, He Remembers It Well. . . ,"
February 1981, 21, 80-81. Study of V. P.—E. Hunt and T. Love, "How Good
Can Memory Be?" in
ed. A. W. Melton and E.
Martin (Washington, D.C.: V. H. Winston and Sons, 1972), 237-60. Nineteenthcentury prodigy—A. Paivio,
(Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum,
1979), 45-76.
19. Students who could remember 73 and 100 digits—Ericsson and Chase (1/
15); K. A. Ericsson, "Memory Skill,"
39 (1985): 188231; M. M- Waldrop, "The Workings of Working Memory,"
237 (1987),
1564-67. Waiter—S. Singular, "A Memory for All Seasonings,"
October 1982, 54-63. Squaring feats—C. Wells, "Teaching the Brain New Tricks,"
March 1983, 49-54, 59-61. Study of T. E.—J. Wilding and E. Valentine,
"One Man's Memory for Prose, Faces, and Names,"
76
(1985): 215-19; J. Wilding and E. Valentine, "Searching for Superior Memories," in
Gruneberg et al. (1/12).
20. K. J. Scoresby, T. Lowe, and K. L. Higbee, "Learning to Be a Born
Mnemonist" (paper presented at the meeting of the Rocky Mountain Psychological
Association, TUcson, Ariz., April 1985).
21. U. Neisser, "Memorists," in
ed. U. Neisser (San Francisco: Freeman, 1982).
22. Klatzky (2/15), 306, 317.
23. R. M. Restak, "Islands of Genius,"
3 (1982): 62-67; M. Howe,
"Memory in Mentally Retarded 'Idiot Savants'," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12).
24. Radio—J. Kasindorf, "Set Your Dial for Sleeplearning," McCalls, September
1974, 50. Studies—L. Aarons, "Sleep-assisted Instruction,"
83
(1976): 1-40; F. Rubin,
(Bristol, England: John Wright & Sons,
1971).

Journal of Gerontology
Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Cognitive Psychology
Human Memory,

Levels ofProcessing in

Mental Representations: A Dual Coding

Approach

Journal of Mental Imagery
Brain Sciences

The Behavioral and

Psychology Today,
The Mind of a Mnemonist

Tbday,

Psychology

Coding Processes in Human Memory,
Imagery and Verbal Processes

Canadian Journal ofPsychology
Science,
Psychology Today,

Esquire,

British Journal of Psychology

Memory Observed,
Science 82

Learning and Sleep

Psychological Bulletin

Chapter Notes

229

25. Controlled studies—C. W. Simon and W. H. Emmons, "Responses to
Material Presented During Various Levels of Sleep
ogy 51 (1956): 89-97; W. H. Emmons and C. W. Simon, "The Non-recall of Material
Presented During Sleep,"
69 (1956): 76-81; D. J.
Bruce, C. R. Evans, P. B. C. Fenwick, and V. Spencer, "Effect of Presenting Novel
Verbal Material During Slow-Wave
225 (1970): 873-74. Advertising—
"Seeping Students Don't Leam English,"
May 1970, 313.
26. F, j. Evans and W. Orchard, "Sleep Learning: The Successful Waking Recall
of Material Presented During Sleep,"
6 (1969): 269.
27. A. Grosvenor and L. D. Lack, "The Effect of Sleep Before or After
Learning on Memory,"
7 (1984): 155-67; C. Idzikowski, "Sleep and Memory,"
75 (1984): 439-49.
28. Johnson and Hasher (1/2); A. Marcel, "Conscious and Unconscious Perception: Experiments on Visual Masking and Word Recognition,"
(1983): 197-37.
29. D. l . Moore, "Subliminal Advertising: What You See Is What You Get,"
46 (1982):' 38-47; J. R. Vokey and J. D. Read, "Subliminal
Messages: Between the Devil and the Media,"
40 (1985):
1231-39.

"Journal ofExperimental PsycholAmerican Journal of Psychology
Sleep,"Nature
Consumer Reports,
Psychophysiology
Sleep
British Journal ofPsychology
Cognitive Psychology 15
Journal of Marketing

American Psychologist

CHAPTER

4

1. D. O. Lyon, "The Relation of Length of Material to Time Taken for Learning
and the Optimum Distribution of Time,"
5 (1914):
1-9, 85-91, 155-63.
2. Clark and Paivio (3/10).
3. T. J. Shuell, "Cognitive Conceptions of Learning,"
56 (1986): 411-36.
4. I. L. Beck and E A. Carpenter, "Cognitive Approaches to Understanding
Reading: Implications for Instructional Practice."
41 (1986):
1098-1105; F. S. Bellezza, "Expert Knowledge as Mental Cues" (Paper presented at
the meeting of the Psychonomic Society, New Orleans, November 1986).
5. Milojkovic (2/9).
6. Sayings—S. Markham, S. Crandall, and K. L. Higbee, "Factors Affecting
Recall of Ideas Learned with a Visual Mnemonic" (paper presented at the meeting of
the Western Psychological Association, San Jose, Calif., April 1985). Elderly—Poon
(1/4). Adolescents—A. J. Franklin, "The Social Context and Socialization Variables as
Factors in Thinking and Learning," in
vol. 2, ed. S. F. Chipman, J. W. Segal, and R. Glaser (Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum, 1985), 81-106.
7. Cues—D. C. Rubin and W. T. Wallace, "Rhyme and Reason: Integral
Properties of Words" (Paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
New Orleans, November 1986). List—Kozlowski (2/25).
8. G. Katona,
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1940), 187-92.
9. Paired-associates—T. R. Barrett and B. R. Ekstrand, "Second-Order Asso-

Journal of Educational Psychology

Research

Review of Educational

American Psychologist

Open Questions,

and Teaching

Thinking and Learning Skills: Research and

Organizing and Memorizing: Studies in the Psychology ofLearning

230

CHAPTER N O T E S

ciations and Single-List Retention," Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory 104 (1974): 41-49. Bridge—N. Charness, "Components of
Skill in Bridge," Canadian Journal of Psychology 33 (1979): 1-16. The Game of Go—

Milojkovic (2/9). Maps—J. E. Oimrod, R. K. Ormrod, E. D. Wagner, and R. C.
McCallin, "Cognitive Strategies in Learning Maps" (paper presented at the meeting
of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, April 1986).
Fleischer—R. Kanigel, "Storing Yesterday,"
32 (June 1981):
27-34. Quote is on p. 34.
10. M. McCloskey and K. Bigler, "Focused Memory Search in Fact Retrieval,"
8 (1980): 253-64.
11. Presenting in categories—B. A. Folarin, "Is Grouping of Words in Memory
a Fast or a Slow Process?"
48 (1981): 355-58. Told categories—
B. Z. Strand, "Effects of Instructions for Category Organization on Long-term
Retention,"
1
(1974): 780-86; M. E. J. Masson and M. A. McDaniel, "The Role of Organizational
Processes in Long-term Retention,"
7 (1981): 100-10.
12. Impose organization—Klatzky (2/15). Recall by categories—B. Ambler and
W. Maples, "Role of Rehearsal in Encoding and Organization for Free Recall,
3 (1977): 295-304. Children—B. E. Moely and W. E. Jeffrey, "The Effect of Organization Training on
Children's Free Recall of Category Items,"
45 (1974): 135-43.
13. Instructed to organize—P. A. Ornstein, T. Trabasso, and P. N. JohnsonLaird, "To Organize Is to Remember: The Effects of Instructions to Organize and to
Recall,"
103 (1974), 1014-18. Organized Paragraphs—J. L. Myers, K. Pezdek, and D. Coulson, "Effect of Prose Organization upon
Free Recall,"
65 (1973): 313-20. Organized Stories—J. B. Black and H. Bern, "Causal Inferences and Memory for Events in
Narrative,
20 (1981): 267-75; Horton
and Mills (2/22). Coherent Pictures—S. E. Palmer, "The Effects of Contextual
Scenes on the Identification of Objects,"
3 (1975): 519-26.
14. H. L. Roediger HI and R. G. Crowder, "A Serial Position Effect in Recall of
United States Presidents,
8 (1976): 275-78.
15. Evidence—Wingfield and, Byrnes (2/3), 26. Explanations—F. S. Bellezza, F.
Andrasik, Jr., and R. D. Lewis, "The Primacy Effect and Automatic Processing in
Free Recall,"
106 (1982): 175-89; A. M. Glenberg,
M. M. Bradley, J. A. Stevenson, T. A. Kraus, M. J. Tkachuk, A. L. Gretz, J. H.
Fish, and B. M. Turpin, "A Two-Process Account of Long-term Serial Position
Effects,
6 (1980):
355-69; C. L. Lee and W. K. Estes, "Item and Order Information in Short-term
Memory: Evidence for Multilevel Perturbation Processes,"
7 (1981): 149-80.
16. C. M. Reigeluth, "Meaningfulness and Instruction: Relating What is Being
Learned to What a Student Knows,"
12 (1983): 197-218; C. M.
Reigeluth, "The Analogy in Instructional Design" (paper presented at the meeting of
the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, April 1986); C. H.
Hansen and D. F. Halpern, "Using Analogies to Improve Comprehension and Recall of

Johns Hopkins Magazine,

Memory & Cognition

Psychological Reports
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory
"Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory
Child Development
Journal of Experimental Psychology
Journal of Educational Psychology
"Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
Memory & Cognition
"Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society
The Journal of General Psychology

"Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory
Instructional Science

Chapter Notes

231

Scientific Passages" (paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Seattle, November 1987); S. Vosniadou and M. Schommer, "The Effect of Explanatory Analogies on Young Children's Comprehension of Expository Text" (paper
presented at the meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San
Francisco, April 1986).
17. A. D. Baddeley, V. Lewis, and I. Nimmo-Smith, "When Did You
Last. . .?" in
ed. M. M. Gruneberg, P. Morris, and R.
N. Sykes (New York: Academic Press, 1978), 77-83; Johnson and Hasher (1/2); J. M.
Keenan, P. Brown, and G. Potts, "The Self-Reference Memory Effect and Imagery"
(paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society, New Orleans, November 1986).
18. Making material meaningful—Reigeluth (4/16, 1983) 197-218. Defining in
terms of association—R. P. Stratton, K. A. Jacobus, and B. Brinley, "Age-ofAcquisition, Imagery, Familiarity, and Meaningfulness Norms for 533 Words,"
7 (1975): 1-6.
19. J. R. Anderson, "Retrieval of Information from Long-term Memory," Sci220 (1983): 25-30; W. A. Wickelgren, "Human Learning and Memory," in
Rosenzweig and Porter (1/2, Vol. 32, 1981), 21-57.
20. J. Brophy, "Teacher Influences on Student Achievement,"
41 (1986): 1069-77; U.S. Department of Education,
(Washington, D.C., 1986), 37.
21. D. Williams and J. D. Hollan, "The Process of Retrieval From Very Longterm Memory,"
5 (1981): 87-119.
22. Witnesses—R. E. Geiselman, R. P. Fisher, D. P. MacKinnon, and H. L.
Holland, "Eyewitness Memory Enhancement with the Cognitive Interview,"
99 (1986): 385-401; K. O'Reilly, D: P. MacKinnon, and R. E.
Geiselman, "Enhancement of Witness Memory for License Plates: At Acquisiton and
Retrieval" (paper presented at the meeting of the Western Psychological Association,
Long Beach, Calif., April 1987). Simulation—R. P. Fisher and R. E. Geiselman,
"Enhancing Eyewitness Memory with the Cognitive Interview," in Gruneberg et al.

Practical Aspects of Memory,

Behav-

ior Research Methods and Instrumentation
ence

chologist
About Teaching and Learning
Cognitive Science

American PsyWhat Works: Research
A merican

Journal of Psychology

(1/12).

Psychology (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1910), 290.
Psychological Review 1 (1894): 602-09. 1960s—R. R. Holt, "Imagery: The Return of the
Ostracized," American Psychologist 19 (1964): 254-64. Human learning—J. A. McGeoch and A. L. Irion, The Psychology of Human Learning, 2d ed. (New York:
23. W. James,

24. 1800s—E. A. Kirkpatrick, "An Experimental Study of Memory,"

Longmans, Green and Co., 1952). Conscious processes—E. R. Hilgard, "Consciousness in Contemporary Psychology," in Rosenzweig and Porter (1/2, vol. 31, 1980),
1-26; T. J. Knapp, '"Die Emergence of Cognitive Psychology in the Latter Half of the
Twentieth Century,"
ed. T.
J. Knapp and L. C. Robertson (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1986), 13-35.
25. For discussions of imagery see M. L. Fleming and D. W. Hutton, eds.,
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Educational Technology Publications, 1983); P. E. Morris and P. J. Hampson,
(London:
Academic Press, 1983); J. T. E. Richardson,
(New York: St. Martin's Press, 1980); Sheikh, Imagery (3/8); A. A. Sheikh and K. S.
Sheikh, ed.,
(Farmingdale, N.Y.: Baywood, 1985); Yuille (3/12).

in Approaches to Cognition: Contrasts and Controversies,

Mental Imagery and Learning

Imagery in Education

Imagery and Consciousness
Mental Imagery and Human Memory

232

CHAPTER N O T E S

26. See reference 25.
27. Prose—M. Denis, "Imagery and Prose: A Critical Review of Research on
Adults and Children," Text 4 (1984): 381-401. Concepts—Markham et al. (4/6); K.
L. Alesandrini, "Imagery Eliciting Strategies and Meaningful Learning," Journal of
Mental Imagery 6 (1982): 125-40.
28. Lorayne (1/17), p. 22.
29. R. S. Nickerson and M.J. Adams, "Long-term Memory for a Common
Object," Cognitive Psychology 11 (1979): 287-307.
30. L. S. Cermak, Improving Your Memory (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976), 27.
31. M. C. Wittrock, "Students' Thought Processes," in Handbook of Research
on Teaching, 3ded., ed. M. C. Wittrock (New York: Macmillan, 1986), 297-314.
CHAPTER

5

1. D. A. Bekerian and A. D. Baddeley, "Saturation Advertising and the Repetition Effect "Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 19 (1980): 17-25; A. M.
Glenberg and M. M. Bradley, "Mental Contiguity," Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 5 (1979): 88-97.
2. School boy—J. Brothers and E. P. F. Eagan, Ten Days to a Successful Memory
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1957), 61. Professor Sanford—E. C. Sanford,
"Professor Sanford's Morning Prayer," in Neisser (3/21), 176-77.
3. Wickelgren (4/19).
4. W. C. F. Krueger, "The Effect of Overlearning on Retention," Journal of
Experimental Psychology 12 (1929): 71-78. See also T. 0. Nelson, R. J. Lonesio, A.
P. Shimamura, R. F. Landwehr, and L. Narens, "Overlearning and the Feeling of
Knowing," Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 8
(1982): 279-88.
5. Bahrick (2/20).
6. Nelson et al. (5/4).
7. R. F. Mayer, "Can You Repeat That? Qualitative Effects of Repetition and
Advance Organizers on LearningfromScience Prose," Journal of Educational Psychology 75 (1983); 40-49.
8. Many of the examples and research reported in this section arefromLoftus
(2/3); Pintrich et al. (1/7); I. G. Sarason, ed., Test Anxiety: Theory, Research and
Application (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1980); andH. M. VanDerPloeg, R. Schwarzer,
and C. D. Spielberger, ed., Advances in Test Anxiety Research, vol. 3 (Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum, 1984).
9. J. C. Cavanaugh, J. G. Grady, and M. Psrlmutter, "Forgetting and Use of
Memory Aids in 20- to 70-Year-Olds' Everyday Life," International Journal ofAging
and Human Development 17 (1983): 113-22.
• 10. Anxiety interference not clear—Pintrich et al. (1/7). Encoding, organizing,
retrieving—W. J. McKeachie, "Does Anxiety Disrupt Information Processing or Does
Poor Information Processing Lead to Anxiety?," International Review of Applied
Psychology 33 (1984): 187-203. Three sources—J. L. Deffenbacher and S. L.
Hazaleus, "Cognitive, Emotional, and Physiological Components of Test Anxiety,"
Cognitive Therapy and Research 9 (1985): 169-80.

Chapter Notes

233

11. Techniques—Sarason (5/8); D. C. Lapp,Don't Forget: Easy Exercises for a
Better Memory at Any Age (New York: McGraw Hill, 1987). Elderly—J. A. Yesavage,
"Relaxation and Memory Training in 39 Elderly Patients," American Journal of
Psychiatry 141 (1984): 778-81; J. A. Yesavage and R. Jacob, "Effects of Relaxation
and Mnemonics on Memory, Attention and Anxiety in the Elderly," Experimental
Aging Research 10 (1984): 211-14. Athletics—J. E. Turnure and J. F. Lane, "Special

Educational Applications of Mnemonics," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 329-57.
12. Nelson et al. (5/4).
13. Study skills—C. E. Weinstein and V. L. Underwood, "Learning Strategies:
The How of Learning," in
vol. 1, ed. J. W. Segal, S. F. Chipman, and R. Glaser (Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum, 1985), 241-58. Learning Strategy Course—W. J. McKeachie, P. R. Pintrich,
and Y. G. Lin, "Learning to Learn," in
ed. G. d'Ydwelle (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1984), 601-18.
14. K. Kirkland and J. G. Hollandsworth, Jr., "Effective Test Taking: SkillsAcquisition Versus Anxiety-Reduction Techniques,
48 (1980): 431-39.
15. Reason and Lucas (2/24).
16. These studies and others are described by Stern (2/3); Johnson and Hasher
(1/2); and A. Memon and V. Bruce, "Context Effects in Episodic Studies of Verbal and
Facial Memory: "A Review,"
4 (1985), 34969.
17. Imagining—S. M. Smith, "Remembering In and Out of Context,
5 (1979): 460-71. Purposely
associating—E. Eich, "Context, Memory, and Integrated Item/Context Imagery,"
11 (1985):
764-70.
18. S. M. Smith, "Enhancement of Recall Using Multiple Environmental Contexts During Learning,"
10 (1982): 405-12.
19. D. M. Landers, "Mental Practice and Imagery in Sports" (paper presented
at the American Imagery Conference, New York, November 1987). R. M. Suinn,
"Imagery and Sports," in Sheikh (3/8), 507-34.
20. Statistics course—S. M. Smith and E. Z. Rothkopf, "Varying Environmental
Context of Lessons to Compensate for Massed Teaching" (paper presented at the
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York, 1982.) Cited
in Smith (5/18). Patients—A. D. Baddeley, "Memory Theory and Memory Therapy,"
in Wilson and Moffat (1/4), 5-27, see page 26.
21. Drugs, moods—P. H. Blaney, "Affect and Memory:
99 (1986): 229-46; D. A. Overton, "Contextual Stimulus Effects of Drugs
and Internal States," in
ed. P. D. Balsam and A. Tomie
(Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1985); G. Lowe, "State-Dependent Retrieval Effects with
Social Drugs," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12). Words, pictures—S. M. Smith, A.
Glenberg, and R. A. Bjork, "Environmental Context and Human Memory,"
6 (1978): 342-53; E. Winograd and S. D. Lynn, "Role of Contextual
Imagery in Associative Recall,"
7 (1979): 29-34.
22. L. Baker and J. L. Santa, "Context, Integration, and Retrieval,"
5 (1977): 308-14.

Research,

Motivation,

Thinking and Learning Skills: Relating Instruction to

Cognition, Information Processing, and
"Journal of Consulting and Clinical

Psychology

Current Psychological Research & Reviews
"Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Memory & Cognition

cal Bulletin

& Cognition

Cognition

A Review,"Psychologi-

Context and Learning,

Memory

Memory & Cognition

Memory &

234

CHAPTER N O T E S

23. Strong—S. M. Smith and E. Vela, ".Outshining: The Relative Effectiveness
of Cues" (paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society, New Orleans,
November 1986); Johnson and Hasher (1/2). Measured—R. A. Bjork and A. Richardson-Klavehn, "Context Reinstatement and Human Memory: A Theoretical Taxonomy
of Empirical Effects" (paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Seattle, November 1987).
24. Brothers and Egan (5/2), 24. On the importance of interest see S. Hidi and
W. Baird, "Interestingness—A Neglected Variable in Discourse Processing," Cognitive Science 10 (1986): 179-94.
25. Hunter (1/5), 122.
26. Children—B. A. Kennedy and D. J. Miller, "Persistent Use of Verbal
Rehearsal as a Function of Information About Its Value," Child Development 47 (1976):
566-69. Adjustments—J. M. Sassenrath, "Theory and Results on Feedback and
Retention," Journal of Educational Psychology 67 (1975): 894-99.
27. R. E. LaPorte and J. F. Voss, "Retention of Prose Materials as a Function
of Postacquisition Testing," Journal ofEducational Psychology 67 (1975): 259-66. See
also K. A. Kiewra and S. L. Benton, "The Effects of Higher-Order Review Questions
with Feedback on Achievement Among Learners Who Take Notes or Receive the
Instructor's Notes," Human Learning 4 (1985): 225-31; and A. W. Salmoni, R. A.
Schmidt, and C. B. Walter, "Knowledge of Results and Motor Learning: A Review
and Critical Appraisal," Psychological Bulletin 95 (1984): 355-86.
28. Corrective feedback—Brophy (4/20). Instructor Program—R. Van Houten,

Learning Through Feedback: A Systematic Approach for Improving Academic Performance (New York: Human Sciences Press, 1980).
29. J. F. King, E. B. Zechmeister, and J. J. Shaughnessy, "Judgments of
Knowing: The Influence of Retrieval Practice," American Journal of Psychology 93
(1980): 329-43.

CHAPTER

6

1. School skills are discussed in R. Carman and W. R. Adams, Study Skills: A
Students Guide for Survival (New York: Wiley, 1985); C. T. Morgan and J. Deese,
How to Study, 2d ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979); W. Plauk, How to Study in
College, 3d ed. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1984).
2. Study time—Underwood (1/3). Narrow range of learning strategies—J. Snowman, "Learning Tactics and Strategies," in Cognitive Classroom Learning: Understanding, Thinking, and Problem Solving, ed. G. D. Phye and T. Andre (New York:
Academic Press, 1986), 243-75. Good students—S. F. Chipman and J. W. Segal,
"Higher Cognitive Goals for Education: An Introduction," in Segal et al. (5/13), 1-19.
3. Weinstein and Underwood (5/13).
4. B. Hayes-Roth, "Evolution of Cognitive Structure and Processes," Psychological Review 84 (1977): 260-78.
5. D. I. Anderson and J. L. Byers, "Effects of Test Items and Degree of
Similarity upon Interference in LearningfromProse Materials," Psychological Reports
42 (1978): 591-600.
6. J. W. Fagen and C. Rovee-Collier, "Memory Retrieval: A Time-Locked
Process in Infency," Science 222 (1983): 1349-51.

Chapter Notes

235

7. Johnson and Hasher (1/2); W. N. Runquist, "The Generality of the Effects of
Structure Similarity on Cue Discrimination and Recall,"
ogy 37 (1983): 484-97; B. Gunter, C. Berry, and B. R. Clifford, "Proactive Interference Effects with Television News Items: Further
7 (1981): 480-87.
8. Rooms—B. Z. Strand, "Change of Context and Retroactive Inhibition,"
9 (1970): 202-06. Speakers—E. Z.
Rothkopf, D. G. Fisher, and M. J. Billington, "Effects of Spatial Context During
Acquisition on the Recall of Attribute Information,"
8 (1982): 126-38.
9. First study—B. J. Underwood and J. S. Freund, "Effect of Temporal Separation of Two Tasks on Proactive Inhibition,"
78
(1968): 50-54. Second study—G. Keppel, "Facilitation in Short- and Long-term
Retention of Paired Associates Following Distributed Practice in Learning,
3 (1964): 91-111.
10. Strand (6/8).
11. First quote—Wickelgren (4/19), 39-40. Second quote—Underwood (1/3),
218.
12. U.S. Dept. of Education,
(4/20), 39. Well-received—J.
Bales,
Consensus Report Gets Good MarksfromResearchers,"
17 (May, 1986): 13; M. S. Smith,
Works!"
15 (April 1986): 29-30; however, see G. V. Glass,
Politics
and Research,"
16 (March, 1987): 5-10.
13. First study—K. C. Bloom and T. J. Shuell, "Effects of Massed and
Distributed Practice on the Learning and Retention of Second-Language Vocabulary,"
74 (1981): 245-48. Second study—A. D. Baddeley
and D. J. A. Longman, "The Influence of Length and Frequency of Training Sessions
on Rate of Learning to Type,"
21 (1978): 627-35. Third study—Bahrick
(3/4); see also H. P. Bahrick and E. Phelps, "Retention of Spanish Vocabulary Over 8
Years
13
(1987): 344-49.
14. Reviewing—J. H. Reynolds and R. Glaser, "Effects of Repetition and Spaced
Review upon Retention of a Complex Learning Task
ogy 55 (1964): 297-308. Teaching—F. N. Dempster, "The Spacing Effect and Allied
Phenomena: Educational Implications" (paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society, New Orleans, November 1986); C. P. Rea and V. Modigliani,
"Educational Implications for the Spacing Effect," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12). Names—
Bahrick (2/20). Faces—A. G. Goldstein and J. E. Chance, "Enhanced Face Recognition Memory After Distributed Viewing" (paper presented at the meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, Seattle, November 1987).
15. Consolidate—H. Weingartner and E. S. Parker, ed.,
(Hillside, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1984). Lecture—F. J. Di Vesta
and D. A. Smith, "The Pausing Principle: Increasing the Efficiency of Memory for
Ongoing Events,"
(1979): 288-96; Other
possible reasons for the spacing effect have also been suggested; see, for example,
R. L. Greene, "Spacing Effects in Memory: The Role of Rehearsal Strategies" (paper
presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Seattle, November 1987).

Canadian Journal ofPsycholEvidence," Journal ofExperimental

Psychology: Human Learning and Memory
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Journal of Educational Psychology
"Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior

What Works
"What Works:
APA
Monitor
"What Works,
Educational
Researcher
"What Works:
Educational Researcher

Journal of Educational Research
Ergonomics
"Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition

"Journal ofEducational Psychol-

Memory Consolidation:
Psychobiology of Cognition
Contemporary Educational Psychology 4

CHAPTER N O T E S

236

Psychology of Classroom Learning

16. R. M. Gorman,
(Columbus, Ohio:
Charles E. Merrill, 1974), 174; Hunter (1/5), 135.
17. A. M. Glenberg and T. S. Lehman, "Spacing Repetitions over 1 Week,"
8 (1980): 528-38.
18. D. C. Candland,
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1968); J. M. Sawrey and C. M. Telford, eds.,
4th
ed. (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1973).
19. M. J. Breen and J. M. Jurek, "Serial Learning as a Function of Age and Part
Versus Whole Learning Procedures,"
36 (1975): 767-73.
20. Hunter (1/5), 133.
21. Gorman (6/16), 173.
22. A. E. D. Schonfield, "Learning, Memory, and Aging," in
ed. J. E. Birren and R. B. Sloane (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall, 1980), 214-44.
23. First study—V. P. Orlando and K . G. Hayward, "A Comparison of the
Effectiveness of Three Study Techniques for College Students," in
ed. P. D. Pearson and J. Hansen (Clemson,
S.C.: National Reading Conference, 1978), 242-45. Second study—C. P. Thompson,
S. J. Wenger, and C. A. Bartling, "How Recall Facilitates Subsequent Recall: A
Reappraisal,"
4
(1978): 210-21. Feedback—J. F. King, E. B. Zechmeister, and J. J. Shaughnessy,
"Judgments of Knowing: The Influence of Retrieval Practice,"
93 (1980): 329-43.
24. Testing—R. J. Nungester and P. C. Duchastel, "Testing Versus Review:
Effects on Retention,"
74 (1982): 18-22; W. B.
Whitten and J. M. Leonard, "LearningfromTests: Facilitation of Delayed Recall by
Initial Recognition Alternatives,
6 (1980): 127-34. Children—T. Petros and K. Hoving, "The Effects of
Review on Young Children's Memory for Prose,"
39 (1980): 33-43.
25. Pauk (6/1), 94; H. C. Ellis,
2d ed. (Dubuque, Iowa; W. C. Brown, 1978), 125.
26. L. T. Frase and B. J. Schwartz, "Effect of Question Production and
Answering on Prose Recall,
67 (1975): 628-35.
27. F. Robinson,
(New York: Harper & Row, 1946).
28. General-purpose systems—D. F. Dansereau, "Learning Strategy Research," in Segal et al. (5/13), 209-39. Reading textbook—H. Singer and D. Donlan,
{Boston: Little, Brown, & Co., 1980). For a more
extensive discussion see F. P. Robinson,
4th ed. (New York: Harper
& Row, 1970) and Morgan and Deese (6/1).
29. L. M. Reder, "Techniques Available to Author, Teacher, and Reader to
Improve Retention of the Main Ideas of a Chapter," Segal, and Glaser in Chipman
(4/6), 37-64; F. K. Aldrich, "Improving the Retention of Aurally Presented Information," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12).
30. J. D. Bransford and M. K. Johnson, "Contextual prerequisites for Understanding: Some Investigations of Comprehension and Recall,"
(1972): 717-26.

Memory & Cognition

Psychology: The Experimental Approach
Educational Psychology,
Psychological Reports

Handbook of

Mental Health and Aging,

Reading: Disci-

plined Inquiry in Process and Practice,

Psychology

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory
American Journal of

and Memory
Psychology
and Cognition,

Journal of Educational Psychology
"Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human Learning
Journal of Experimental Child
Fundamentals of Human Learning, Memory,

"Journal ofEducational Psychology
Effective Study

Reading and Learning from Text

Learning and Verbal Behavior 11

Effective Study,

Journal of Verbal

Chapter Notes

237

31. Advance organizers—-J. Luiten, W. Ames, and G. Ackerson, "A Metaanalysis of the Effects of Advance Organizers on Learning and Retention,"
17 (1980): 211-18; D. N. Thompson, K. Diefenderfer,
and L. S. Doll, "The Use of Advance Organizers with Older Adults of Limited Verbal
Ability" (paper presented at the meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, San Francisco, April 1986). Headings—Dansereau (6/28); Snowman
(6/2); S. C. Wilhite, "Headings as Memory Facilitators," in Gruneberg, et al. (1/12).
32. Alesandrini (4/27); J. L. Levin, "Pictures as Prose-learning Devices," in
ed. A. Flammer & W. Kintsch (Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1982), 412-44; J. R. Levin, G. J. Anglin, and R. N. Carney, "On Empirically Validating
Functions of Pictures in Prose," in
vol.
1; D. M. Willows and H. A. Houghton (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987), 51-85.
33. J. R. Gavelek and T. E. Raphael, "Metacognition, Instruction, and the Role
of Questioning Activities," in
vol. 2, ed. D. L. Forrest-Pressley, G. E. MacKinnon, and
T. G. Waller (Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press, 1985), 103-36; C. Hamaker, "The
Effects of Adjunct Questions on Prose Learning,"
56
(1986): 212-42.
34. Snowman (6/2); L. K. Cook and R. E. Mayer, "Reading Strategies Training
for Meaningful Learning from Prose," in
ed. M. Pressley andj. R. Levin (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1983), 87131; J. Hartley, S. Bartlett, and A. Branthwaite, "Underlining Can Make a Difference—Sometimes,
73 (1980): 218-23.
35. J. P. Rickards and G. J. August, "Generative Underlining Strategies in Prose
Recall,"
67 (1975): 860-65.
36. Psychologist—M. Linton, "Real World Memory After Six Years:
Study of Very Long Term Memory," in Gruneberg et al. (4/17). Lecture—Di Vesta
and Smith (6/15). Pakistani—M. Wasim, "Effect of Frequent Review upon Recall,"
1-2 (1984), 69-73.
37. First study—L. R. Gay, "Temporal Position of Review and Its Effect on the
Retention of Mathematical Rules,
64 (1973): 17182. Children—Petros and Hoving (6/24).
38. Hunter (1/5), 108-09.
39. T. K. Landauer and R. A. Bjork, "Optimum Rehearsal Patterns and Name
Learning, "in Gruneberg etal. (4/17), 625-32; R. A. Bjork, "Practical and Theoretical
Implications of a Non-Semantic Mnemonic Technique," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12).
40. Snowman (6/2); K. A. Kiewra, "Investigating Notetaking and Review: A
Depth of Processing Alternative,"
29 (1985): 23-32; K. A.
Kiewra and B. M. Frank, "The Encoding and External-Storage Effects of Personal
Lecture Notes, Skeletal Notes, and Detailed Notes of Field-Independent and FieldDependent Learners" (paper presented at the meeting of the American Educational
Research Association, San Francisco, April 1986).
41. R. J. Palkovitz and R. K. Lore, "Note Taking and Note Review: Why
Students Fail Questions Based on Lecture Material,"
7 (1980):
159-61.
42. H. Woodrow, "The Effect of Type of Training upon Transference,"
18 (1927): 159-72.

American

Educational Research Journal

Discourse Processing,

The Psychology ofIllustration: Basic Reseach,

Instructional Practices,

Metacognition, Cognition, and Human Performance:
Review of Educational Research

Applications,

Cognitive Strategy Research: Educational

"Journal ofEducational Research
Journal ofEducational Psychology

hnln Vivo

Journal ofSocial Sciences and the Humanities
"Journal of Educational Psychology

Educational Psychologist

ofEducational Psychology

Teaching ofPsychology
Journal

238

CHAPTER N O T E S

43. Learning strategies—Snowman (6/2); Dansereau (6/28); Weinstein and
Underwood (5/13); J. Nisbet and J. Shucksmith, Learning Strategies (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1986). Courses—Pintrich et al. (1/7).
44. U.S. Department of Education, What Works (4/20), 39.
45. Increase performance—J. L. Driskell and E. L. A. Kelly, "A Guided
Notetaking and Study Skills System for Use with University Freshmen Predicted to
Fail "Journal ofReading 1 (1980): 4-5. Brain-damaged people—Wilson and Moffat (1/
4); B. A. Wilson, Rehabilitation of Memory (New York: Guilford Press, 1987).
Analysis—D. F. Tadlock, "SQ3R—Why It Works Based on Information Processing
Theory," Journal of Reading 22 (1978): 110-112.
46. Intuitive appeal, opinion—Cook and Mayer (6/34); J. L. Johns and L. P.
McNamara, "The SQ3R Study Technique: A Forgotten Research Target," Journal of
Reading 23 (1980): 705-08. Children—D. L. Forrest-Pressley and L. A. Gillies,
"Children's Flexible Use of Strategies During Reading," in Pressley and Levin (6/34).
CHAPTER

7

1. F. Yates, The Art of Memory (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1966);
K. L. Higbee, "Recent Research on Visual Mnemonics: Historical Roots and Educational Fruits," Review of Educational Research 49 (1979): 611-29; R. A. Hrees, "An
Edited Version of MnemonicsfromAntiquity to 1985: Establishing a Foundation for
Mnemonic-Based Pedagogy with Particular Emphasis on Mathematics," (Ph.D. diss.,
Indiana University, 1986).
2. These and other characteristics of mnemonics are discussed by F. S. Bellezza, "Mnemonic Devices: Classification, Characteristics, and Criteria," Review of
Educational Research 51 (1981): 247-75.
3. Some of the examples not otherwise referenced are contained in A Dictionary
ofMnemonics (London: EyreMethuen, 1972); and P. Bracken, The I Hate to Housekeep
Book, chap. 10 (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1962).
4. M. Suid, Demonic Mnemonics: 800 Spelling Tricks for 800 Thcky Words
(Belmont, Calif.: Pitman Learning, Inc., 1981); G. A. Negin, "Mnemonics and
Demonic Words," Reading Improvement 15 (1978): 180-82.
5. E. Pugh, A Dictionary ofAcronyms and Abbreviations (London: Clive Bingley
Ltd.; Hamden, Conn.; Archon Books, 1970); D. R. White, A Glossary ofAcronyms,
Abbreviations, and Symbols (Germantown, Md.: Don White Consultants, 1971).
6. A. G. Smith, living's Anatomy Mnemonics, 5th ed. (Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1972).
7. J. E. Harris, "Memory Aids People Use: Two Interview Studies," Memory &
Cognition 8 (1980): 31-38; M. M. Gruneberg, J. Monks, and R. N. Sykes, "The
First-Letter Mnemonic Aid,"Z/?G4 Medical Science: Psychology and Psychiatry; Social
and Occupational Medicine 5 (1977): 304; B. Wilson and N. Moffat, "Running a
Memory Group," in Wilson and Moffat (1/4), 171-98; Wilson (6/45). For a different
viewpoint see L. Carson, J. W. Zimmer, and J. A. Glover, "First-Letter Mnemonics:
DAM (Don't Aid Memory)," The Journal of General Psychology 104 (1981): 287-92.
8. P. E. Morris and N. Cook, "When Do First-Letter Mnemonics Aid Recall?"
British Journal ofEducational Psychology 48 (1978): 22-28.

Chapter Notes

239

9. Words—M. Ozier, "Access to the Memory Trace Through Orthographic and
Categoric Information,"
4 (1978): 469-85; D. C. Rubin, "Very Long-Term Memory For Prose and
Verse,
16 (1977): 611-21. Alphabet—
N. Moffat, "Strategies of Memory Therapy," in Wilson & Moffat (1/4), 63-88.
10. R. C. Atkinson, "Mnemotechnics in Second-Language Learning,"American
(1975): 821-28.
11. Properties, principles—Hirnure and Lane (5/11). Vocabulary—M. Pressley,
J. R. Levin, and H. D. Delaney, "The Mnemonic Keyword Method,"
52 (1982): 61-91.
12. Recent textbook—Stem (2/3), 211. The four quotes are by, respectively,
Ian Hunter (1964), Donald Norman, Alan Baddeley, and Lloyd Peterson and appear in
K. L. Higbee, "Some Pseudo-Limitations of Mnemonics" (paper presented at the
International Conference on Practical Aspects of Memory, Cardiff, Wales, September
1978). Available in
9 (1979): 1920; condensed version in Gruneberg et al. (4/17), 147-54.
13. Bellezza (7/2); F. S. Bellezza, "Mnemonic Devices and Memory Schemas,"
in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10); R. De Beni, "La Ricerca Sperimentale Sulle
Mnemotecniche: Una Rassegna" (Experimental Research on Mnemonics: A Review),
11 (1984): 421-56; M. J. Dickel, "Principles of Encoding
Mnemonics,"
57 (1983): 111-18; J. L. Oaks and K. L.
Higbee, "Process Mnemonics and Principles of Memory" (paper presented at the
meeting of the Western Psychological Association, San Jose, Calif., April 1985).
14. E. J. Forbes and H. W. Reese, "Pictorial Elaboration and Recall of Multilist
Paired Associates,"
102 (1974): 836-40; F. S.
Bellezza, "Updating Memory Using Mnemonic Devices,"
14
(1982): 301-27.
15. W. D. Rohwer, Jr. and J. Thomas, "The Rble of Mnemonic Strategies in
Study Effectiveness," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 428-44; Snowman (6/2); J.
Snowman, "Explorations in Mnemonic Training," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10).
16. For additional research references on interaction, vividness, and bizarreness
see Higbee (7/1).
17. K. L. Alesandrini, "Cognitive Strategies in Advertising Design," in Pressley
and Levin (1/10), 203-20; V. A. Bergfeld, L. S. Choate, and N. E. A. Kroll, "The
Effect of Bizarre Imagery on Memory as a Function of Delay: A Reconfirmation of the
Interaction Effect,"
6 (1982): 141-58; D. W. Kee and S. Y.
Nakayama, "Automatic Elaborative Encoding in Children's Associative Memory,"
16 (1980): 287-90. E. Winograd and E. W. Simon,
"Visual Memory and Imagery in the Aged," in Poon et al. (1/12), 485-506.
18. For more information on interacting imagery see reviews by I. Begg,
"Imagery Instruction and the Organization of Memory," in Yuille (3/12), 91-115 and
Richardson (4/25). Compare words—R. R. Hunt and M. Marschark, "Yet Another
Picture of Imagery: The Roles of Shared and Distinctive Information in Memory," in
McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 129-50. Children—P. Cramer, "Imagery and Learning:
Item Recognition and Associative Recall,"
73
(1981): 164-73.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and,
Memory
"Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior

Psychologist 39

Review of

Educational Research

JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology

Girnale Italiano diPsicologta
Perceptual and Motor Skills

Journal of Experimental Psychology
Cognitive Psychology

Journal of Mental Imagery
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society

Journal of Educational Psychology

240

CHAPTER N O T E S

19. Begg (7/18); I. Begg, "Images, Organization, and Discriminative
Processes,"
36 (1982); 273-90.
20. Alesandrini (4/27).
21. G. H. Ritchey and C. R. Beal, "Image Detail and Recall: Evidence for
Within-Item Elaboration,"
6 (1980): 66-76.
22. E S. Bellezza, "Mnemonic-Device Instruction with Adults," in Pressley and
Levin (1/10), 51-73.
23. Defining and measuring vividness—A. Ahsen, "Prologue to Vividness Paradox,"
10 (1986): 1-8; D. Reisberg, L. C. Culver, F.
Heuer, and D. Fischman, "Visual Memory: When Imagery Vividness Makes a
Difference,"
10 (1986): 51-74. Paired-associates—G. H.
Bower, "Mental Imagery and Associative Learning," in
ed. L. W. Gregg (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1972), 51-88. List of
words—P. S. Delin, "Learning and Retention of English Words with Successive
Approximations to a Complex Mnemonic Instruction,"
17 (1969):
87-88.
24. Mental practice—A. Richardson, "The Voluntary Use of Memory Imagery
as an Aid to Learning and Performance," in Fleming and Hutton (4/25), 21-32.
Information about people—W. B. Swann, Jr., and L. C. Miller, "Why Never Forgetting
a Face Matters: Visual Imagery and Social Memory
43 (1982): 475-80. Imagery mnemonics—A. Katz, "Individual Differences
in the Control of Imagery Processing: Knowing How, Knowing When, and Knowing
Self," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 177-203.
25. See reviews by G. Einstein and M. McDaniel, "Distinctiveness and the
Mnemonic Benefits of Bizarre Imagery," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 7.9-102.
K. Wollen and M. G. Margres, "Bizarreness and the Imagery Multiprocess Model,"
in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 103-27.
26. H. S. Hock, L. Romanski, A. Galie, and C. S. Williams, "Real-World
Schemata and Scene Recognition in Adults and Children,"
6
(1978): 423-31.
27. H. Lorayne and J. Lucas,
(New York: Ballantine Books,
1975), 25-26.
28. L. W. Poon and L. Walsh-Sweeney, "Effects of Bizarre and Interacting
Imagery on Learning and Retrieval of the Aged,"
(1981): 65-70.
29. Adept—J. L. Levin and M. Pressley, "Understanding Mnemonic Imagery
Effects: A Dozen 'Obvious' Outcomes," in Fleming and Hutton (4/25), 33-51. College
students—F. S. Bellezza, J. C. Day, and K. R. Reddy, "A Comparison of Phonetic
and Semantic Encoding Mnemonics,"
2 (1982): 49-60.
30. Paired associates—K. A. Wollen and D. H. Lowry, "Effects of Imagery on
Paired-associate Learning,
10 (1971):
276-84. Abstract words—W. E. Montague, "Elaborative Strategies in Verbal Learning and Memory," in Bower (2/12, vol. 6, 1972), 225-302. Sayings—K. L. Higbee
and R. J. Millard, "Effects of an Imagery Mnemonic and Imagery Value on Memory
for SayingsBulletin
17 (1981): 215-16. Concepts—A. N.
Katz and A. Paivio, "Imagery Variables in Concept Identification,"

Canadian Journal ofPsychology

Memory

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and

Journal of Mental Imagery
Journal of Mental Imagery
Memory,

Cognition in Learning and

Psychonomic Science

"Journal ofPersonality and Social

Psychology

Memory & Cognition

The Memory Book

Experimental Aging Research 7

Human Learning
"Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior

of the Psychonomic Society

Journal of Verbal

Chapter Notes

241

Learning and Verbal Behavior 14 (1975): 284-93; J. C. Dyer and E A. Meyer,
"Facilitation of Simple Concept Identification Through Mnemonic Instruction, "Journal
ofExperimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 2 (1976): 767-73.

31. S. A. Soraci, Jr., J. J. Franks, J. P. Bransford and R. C. Chechile, "A
Multiple-Cue Model of Generation Activity" (paper presented at the meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, Seattle, November 1987); T. D. Lee and J. D. Gallagher, "A
Parallel Between the Preselection Effect in Psychomotor Memory and the Generation
Effect in Verbal Memory,"
7 (1981): 77-78; C. P. Thompson and C. Barnett, "Memory for Product
Names: The Generation Effect,"
18 (1981): 24143; M. M. Sebrechts, C. T. Furstenberg, and R. M. Shelton, "Remembering
Computer Command Names: Effects of Subject Generation Versus Experimenter
Imposition,"
18 (1986): 12934.
32. C. Clawson, L. Delano, S. Campbell, and K. L. Higbee, "Practical Applications of Visual Mnemonics: Errands" (Paper presented at the meeting of the Western
Psychological Association, San Jose, Calif., April 1985); M. Dickel and S. Slak,
"Imagery Vividness and Memory for Verbal Material,"
7
(1983): 121-26; Higbee (7/1); D. G. Jamieson and M. G. Schimpf, "Self-Generated
Images Are More Effective Mnemonics,
(1980): 25-33.
33. Associations suggested—Higbee (7/1); J. R. Levin, "The Mnemonic 80's:
Keywords in the Classroom,"
16 (1981): 65-82; C. Carrier,
K. Karbo, H. Kindem, G. Legisa, and L. Newstrom "Use of Self-generated and
Supplied Visuals as Mnemonics in Gifted Children's Learning,"
57 (1983): 235-40. Effective images—Alesandrini (4/27).
34. Preschoolers—M. Pressley, J. Samuel, M. M. Hershey, S. L. Bishop, and
D. Dickinson, "Use of a Mnemonic Technique to Teach Young Children Foreign
Language Vocabulary,"
6 (1981): 110-16. Most
children from age eleven—Denis (4/27), 381-401. Gifted children—Carrier et al. (7/
33), 235-40. Brain-damaged people—Wilson (6/45).
35. Levin (7/33), 65-82.
36. College students—R. Sommer,
(New York: Dell, 1978), 127; K. A. Blick and C. J. Waite, "A Survey of Mnemonic
Techniques Used by College Students in Free-recall Learning,"
29 (1971): 76-78. English college students and housewives—Harris (7/7), 31-38.
Elderly—Winograd and Simon (7/17).
37. Snowman (6/2).
38. Positive relationship between recall and rated vividness—R. C. Anderson
andj. L. Hidde, "Imagery and Sentence Learning,"
62 (1971): 526-30. Sentences and paragraphs—P. J. Holmes and D. J. Murray, "Free
Recall of Sentences as a Function of Imagery and Predictability,"
102 (1974): 748-50; W. E. Montague and J. F. Carter, "Vividness
of Imagery in Recalling Connected Discourse,"
(1973): 72-75. Adjectives— E. P. Kirchner, "Vividness of Adjectives and the Recall
of Meaningful Verbal Material,"
15 (1969): 71-72. Familarity—
B. A. Bracken, "Relative Image-Evoking Ability of Personalized and Nonpersonalized
Sentences,"
5 (1981): 121-24. Some studies have not

Memory

Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society

Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers

Skills

Journal of Mental Imagery
"Journal ofMental Imagery 4
Educational Psychologist
Perceptual and Motor

Contemporary Educational Psychology

The Mind's Eye: Imagery in Everyday Life
Psychological Reports

Journal ofEducational Psychology
Journal of Experimental Psychology
Journal of Educational Psychology 64
Psychonomic Science
Journal of Mental Imagery

242

CHAPTER N O T E S

found vividness effects for verbal materials, due at least in part to differences in
definitions and methods; see S. E. Taylor and S. C. Thompson, "Stalking the Elusive
'Vividness' Effect," Psychological Review 89 (1982): 155-81.
39. R. C. Anderson, "Concretization and Sentence Learning," Journal of Educational Psychology 66 (1974): 179-83; Alesandrini (4/27).
CHAPTER

8

1. G. A. Miller, E. Galanter, and K. H. Pribram, Plans and the

Behavior (New York: Holt, 1960), 134.

Structure of

2. W. H. Burnham, "Memory, Historically and Experimentally Considered: I.
An Historical Sketch of the Older Conceptions of Memory," American Journal of
Psychology 2 (1888): 39-90.
3. Book on mnemonics—McDaniel and Pressley (3/10). Detailed account of
legitimacy—Higbee (7/12); Higbee (7/1); K. L. Higbee, "The Legitimacy of Mnemonics in Instruction," The Journal of the International Learning Science Association 1
(1982): 9-13.
4. C. Cornoldi, "Why Study Mnemonics?" in Gruneberg et al. (1/12); M.
Pressley and M. A. McDaniel, "Doing Mnemonics Research Well: Some General
Guidelines and a Study," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12); P. Morris, "Practical Strategies
for Human Learning and Remembering," in Adult Learning: Psychological Research
and Applications, ed. M. J. A. Howe (London: Wiley, 1977), 125-44; I. M. L. Hunter,
"Imagery, Comprehension, and Mnemonics," Journal of Mental Imagery 1 (1977):
65-72.
5. Clark and Paivio (3/10).
6. Two seconds—B. R. Bugelski, E. Kidd, and J. Segmen, "Imagery as a
Mediator in One-Trial Paired-Associate Learning, "Journal ofExperimental Psychology
76 (1968): 69-73. Associations, pictures—W. A. Wickelgren, Learning and Memory
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1977), 338. Significance of time difference—
B. R. Bugelski, "The Image as Mediator in One-Trial Paired-Associate Learning: III.
Sequential Functions in Serial Lists, "Journal of Experimental Psychology 103 (1974):
298-303; R. R. Hoffman, A. Fenning, and T. Kaplan, "Image Memory and Bizarreness: There Is an Effect" (paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic
Society, Philadelphia, November 1981). Paired associates—B. R. Bugelsld, "Words
and Things and Images," American Psychologist 25 (1970): 1002-12.
7. Practice improves speed—Katz (7/24). Learning German—J. W. Hall and K.
C. Fuson, "Presentation . Rates in Experiments on Mnemonics: A Methodological
Note," Journal ofEducational Psychology 78 (1986): 233-34.
8. Gruneberg et al (7/7), 304.
9. A. Corbett, "Retrieval Dynamics for Rote and Visual Imagery Mnemonics,"
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 16 (1977): 233-46.
10. Bellezza (7/22).
11. Clark and Paivio (3/10).
12. P. M. Wortman and P. B. Sparling, "Acquisition and Retention of Mnemonic
Information in Long-term Memory," Journal of Experimental Psychology 102 (1974):
22-26.

Chapter Notes

243

13. Wortraan and Sparling (8/12); F. J. Di Vesta and P. M. Sunshine, "The
Retrieval of Abstract and Concrete Materials as Functions of Imagery, Mediation, and
Mnemonic
(1974): 340-44.
14. Bellezza (7/2).
15. T. Scruggs, M. A. Mastropieri, J. R. Levin, and J. S. Gaffhey, "Facilitating
the Acquisition of Science Facts in Learning-disabled Students,"
(1984): 575-86.
16. D. W. Hutton and J. A. Lescohier, "Seeing to Learn: Using Mental Imagery
in the Classroom," in Fleming and Hutton (4/25), 113-32; G. E. Speidel & M. E.
Troy, "The Ebb and Flow of Imagery in Education," in Sheikh and Sheikh (4/25), 1138.
17. People differ—Richardson (4/25), chap. 9.; M. E. Sutherland, J. P Harrell,
and C. Isaacs, "The Stability of Individual Differences in Imagery Ability,"
11 (1987): 97-104. Benefit more by making visual associations—J. A.
Slee, "The Use of Visual Imagery in Visual Memory Tasks: A Cautionary Note," in
Fleming and Hutton (4/25), 53-74; A. Katz, "What Does it Mean to be a High
Imager?" in Yuille (3/12), 39-63; M. Denis, "Individual Imagery Differences and
Prose Processing," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 204-17.
18. Capacity to use imagery—Paivio (3/14), chap. 6; A. Richardson, "The
Voluntary Use of Memory Imagery as an Aid to Learning and Performance," in
Fleming and Hutton (4/25), 21-32; A. A. Sheikh, K. S. Sheikh, and L. M. Moleski,
"The Enhancement of Imaging Ability," in Sheikh and Sheikh (4/25); 223-39. Learned
skill—Bellezza
Katz (8/17). Practice activities to help develop imagery ability
are given by K. Hanks and L. Belliston,
(Los Altos, Calif.: William Kaufman, 1980).
19. M. Pressley and J. R. Levin, "Elaborative Learning Strategies for the
Inefficient Learner," in
ed. S. J. Ceci (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1986); M. Pressley,
C. J. Johnson, and S. Symons, "Elaborating to Learn and Learning to Elaborate,"
29 (1987): 76-91; Poon (1/4); J. T. E. Richardson, L.
S. Cermak, S. P. Blackford, and M. O'Connor, "The Efficacy of Imagery Mnemonics
Following Brain Damage," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 303-28; J. E. Turnure
and J. F. Lane (5/11); M. Mastropieri, T. Scruggs, and J. R. Levin, "Mnemonic
Instruction in Special Education," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 358-76; Wilson
(6/45).
20. Bugelski (8/6, 1974); A. Paivio, "Imagery and Long-term Memory," in
ed. A. Kennedy and A. Wilkes (New York: John Wiley
and Sons, 1975), 57-88.
21. Higbee (7/1); M. Pressley, "Elaboration and Memory Development,"
53 (1982): 296-309; M. Pressley and J. Dennis-Rounds, "Transfer of a
Mnemonic Keyword Strategy at Two Age Levels
72 (1980): 575-82.
22. Comprehensive instructions—J. T. O'Sullivan and M. Pressley, "Completeness of Instruction and Strategy Transfer
38 (1984): 275-88; Snowman (7/15). Kindergarten—E. B. Ryan, G. W. Ledger, and
K. A. Weed, "Acquisition and Transfer of an Integrated Imagery Strategy by Young
Children,"
58 (1987): 443-52.

Aids," Memory & Cognition 2

tional Research Journal 22

Mental Imagery

(7/22);
Vtzualization ofIdeas

American Educa-

Journal of

Rapid Viz: A New Method for the Rapid

Handbook of Cognitive, Social, and Neuropsychological Aspects
ofLearning Disabilities,
Journal ofLearning Disabilities

Studies in Long Term Memory,

Development

Child
"Journal of Educational Psychology

"Journal of Experimental Child Psychology

Child Development

244

CHAPTER N O T E S

23. Prompting—Pressley & Dennis-Rounds (8/21). Older children—B. F. Jones
and J. W. Hall, "School Applications of the Mnemonic Keyword Method as a Study
Strategy by Eighth
72 (1982): 230-37;
M. Pressley, J. R. Levin, and S. L. Bryant, "Memory Strategy Instruction During
Adolescence: When Is Explicit Instruction Needed?" in Pressley and Levin (1/10),
25-49.
24. M. Pressley, D. L. Forrest-Pressley, E. Elliot-Faust, and G. Miller,
"Children's Use of Cognitive Strategies, How to Teach Strategies, and What To Do If
They Can't Be Taught," in.Pressley and Brainerd (1/13), 1-47.
25. Students—K. L. Higbee, "What Do College Students Get From a MemoryImprovement Course" (paper presented at the meeting of the Eastern Psychological
Association, New York City, April 1981). Elderly—J. D. Pratt and K. L. Higbee, "Use
of an Imagery Mnemonic by the Elderly in Natural Settings,"
(1983): 227-35; L. E. Wood and J. D. Pratt, "Pegword Mnemonic as an Aid to
Memory in the Elderly: A Comparison of Four Age Groups,"
13 (1987): 325-37;
(1/4); Roberts (1/10).
26. Any mental skill—Turnure and Lane (5/11); P. L. Peterson and S. R. Swing,
"Problems in Classroom Implementation of Cognitive Strategy Research," in Pressley
and Levin (6/34), 267-87; E. C. Butterfield, "Toward Solving the Problem of
Transfer," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12). J. R. Hayes, "Three Problems in Teaching
General Skills," in Chipman et al. (4/6), 391-406. Therapy—Baddeley (5/20), 26.
27. S. J. Derry and D. A. Murphy, "Systems That Train Learning Ability: From
Theory to Practice,"
56 (1986): 1-39; Katz (7/24);
M. Pressley, J. G Borkowski, and J. O'Sullivan, "Children's Metamemory and the
Teaching of Memory Strategies," in
vol. 1, ed. D. L. Forrest-Pressley, G. E. MacKinnon,
and T. G. Waller (Orlando, Fla.: Academic Press, 1985), 111-53; Pressley et al.
(1/7).
28. Pauk (6/1), 111.
29. G. H. Bower, "Educational Applications of Mnemonic Devices," in
ed. K. 0. Doyle, Jr. (Lexington, Mass.: D. C;
Heath & Co., 1973), 201-10. Quote is on page 209.
30. Numerous additional research references on these pseudo-limitations, including sources of research studies and quotations referred to but not cited in this
chapter, can be found in Higbee (7/12).
31. Loftus (2/3), 187.
32. Vocational, military uses—Turnure and Lane (5/11). Military training—R.
Braby, J. P. Kincaid, and F. A. Aagard,
(TAEG Report no. 60, Orlando, Fla.: U.S. Navy Training
Analysis and Evaluation Group, July 1978); D. Griffith,

Graders," Journal of Educational Psychology

Poon

Human Learning 2
Educational Gerontology

Review of Educational Research
Metacognition, Cognition, and Human Performance: Theoretical Perspectives,

tion: Readings in Human Psychology,

Interac-

Use of Mnemonics in Training Materials: A
Guide for Technical Writers
A Review of the Literature on
Memory Enhancement: The Potential and Relevance of Mnemotechnks for Military
Training (Technical Report no. 436, Fort Hood, Tex.: U.S. Army Research Institute
for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, December 1979). Prose—Denis (4/27); C.
McCormick and J. R. Levin, "Mnemonic Prose-Learning Strategies, "in McDaniel and
Pressley (3/10); 392-406.
33. Wilson and Moffat (1/4); Wilson (6/45).

Chapter Notes

245

34. Potential value of imagery techniques—Wittrock (4/31). Research on mental
elaboration in instruction—Levin (7/33); Levin and Pressley (7/29); J. R. Levin and
M. Pressley, "Mnemonic Vocabulary Instruction: What's Fact, What's Fiction," in
vol. 2, ed. R. F. Dillon (Orlando, Fla.: Academic
Press, 1985), 145-72.
35. Problem solving—G. Kaufman and T. Helstrup, "Mental Imagery and
Problem Solving: Implications for the Educational Process," in Sheikh and Sheikh (4/
25), 113-44.
36. H. H. Kendler,
3d ed. (Menlo Park, Calif.
W. A. Benjamin, 1977), 205.
37. Clawson et al. (7/32); T. Lowe, K. J. Scoresby, and K. L. Higbee, "The
Role of Effort in Using a Visual Mnemonic" (paper presented at the meeting of the
Western Psychological Association, San Jose, Calif., April 1985).
38. Sentences—J. D. Bransford and B. S. Stein,
(San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1984), 54-58. Facts—G. L. BradshawandJ. R. Anderson,
"Elaborative Encoding As an Explanation of Levels of Processing,"
21 (1982): 165-74; see also Horton and Mills (2/22),
247-75.
39. Bellezza (7/2); Levin and Pressley (8/34).
40. Hunter (8/4), 70.
41.
2d ed. (Del Mar, Calif.: CRM Books,
1972), 97.
42. Bellezza (7/2).

Individual Differences in Cognition,

Basic Psychology: Brief Version,

The Ideal Problem Solver
Journal of Verbal

Learning and Verbal Behavior

Psychology Today: An Introduction,

CHAPTER

9

1. Third difference—Bugelski (8/6, 1974). Fourth difference—L. W. Barsalou
and D. R. Sewell, "Contrasting the Representation of Scripts and Categories,
24 (1985): 646-65.
2. D. L. Foth, "Mnemonic Technique Effectiveness as a Function of Word
Abstractness and Mediation Instruction,"
(1973): 239-45.
3. K. L. Higbee, "Mnemonic Systems in Memory: Are They Worth the Effort?"
(paper presented at the meeting of the Rocky Mountain Psychological Association,
Phoenix, Ariz., May 1976); Griffith (8/32).
4. First finding—Bellezza (7/14). Secondfinding—Bellezza(7/22). Third finding—F. S. Bellezza, "The Spatial-Arrangement Mnemonic,"
75 (1983): 830-37. Fourth finding—H. L. Roediger III, "The Effectiveness
of Four Mnemonics in Ordering Recall,"
6 (1980): 558-67. Fifthfinding—B.R. Bugelski, "The Association of Images," in
ed. J. M. Nichols (Boston:
D. Reidel, 1977), 37-46.
5. Clawson et al. (7/32).
6. Studies of effectiveness—Snowman (6/2). Five lists—F. S. Bellezza, "A
Mnemonic Based on Arranging Words on Visual Patterns,"

ofMemory and Language

Behavior 12

"Journal

Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal

Journal of Educational
Psychology
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory
Images, Perception, and Knowledge,
Journal of Educational

246

CHAPTER N O T E S

Psychology 78 (1986): 217-24. Long list—F. S. Bellezza, D. L. Richards, and R.
Geiselman, "Semantic Processing and Organization in Free Recall," Memory &
Cognition 4 (1976): 415-21; F. S. Bellezza, F. L. Chessman II, and B. G. Reddy,
"Organization and Semantic Elaboration in Free Recall," Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 3 (1977): 539-50; G. Gainst and J. S.
Freund, "Effects of Subject-generated Stories on Recall, " Bulletin of the Psychonomic
Society 12 (1978): 185-88.
7. India—S. K. Gupta, "Associative Memory: Role of Mnemonics in Information
Processing and Ordering Recall," Psycho-Lingua 15 (1985), 89-94. Amnesiac patients—R. Kovner, S. Mattis, and R. Pass, "Some Patients Can Freely Recall Large
Amounts of Information in New Contexts," Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology 7 (1985): 395-411. Brain-damaged patients—Wilson (6/45).
8. G. H. Bower, "How to . . . uh . . . Remember!" Psychology Tbday, October
1973, 63-70. Quote is on page 63.
9. D. Carnegie, Public Speaking and Influencing Men in Business (New York:
Association Press, 1926), 60.
10. D. W. Matheson, Introductory Psychology: The Modern View (Hinsdale, HI.:
The Dryden Press, 1975), 233.
11. T. B. Woodbury, "Be-attitudes in Business," in Successful Leadership, ed.

M. L. Waters (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1961), 236-50. Quote is on page 236.
12. Hanks and Belliston (8/18), 135.
13. Several examples of how to do this are provided in B. Furst, Stop Forgetting,
chap. 10, rev. L. Furst and G. Storm (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday & Co., 1979).
14. C. V. Young, The Magic of a Mighty Memory (West Nyack, N.Y.: Parker
Publishing Co., 1971), 67.
15. Some examples are T. Buzan, Speed Memory (London: Sphere Books Ltd.,
1971); D. Hersey, How to Cash in on Your Hidden Memory Power (Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1963); Lorayne and Lucas (7/27); T. G. Madsen, How to Stop
Forgetting and Start Remembering (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press,
1970); M. N. Young and W. B. Gibson, How to Develop an Exceptional Memory (North
Hollywood, Calif.: Wilshire Book Co., 1974).
CHAPTER

10

1. Yates (7/1).

American Scientist 58 (1970):
496-510; C. Cornoldi and R. De Beni, "Imagery and the 'Loci' Mnemonic," International Imagery Bulletin 2 (1984): 10-13; C. Cornoldi and R. De Beni, "Retrieval
Times in the Use of Concrete and Abstract Mnemonic Cues Associated to Loci," in
Imagery 2, ed. D. F. Marks and D. G. Russell (Dunedin, New Zealand: Human
Performance Associates, in press); G. Lea, "Chronometric Analysis of the Method of
Loci," Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 104
(1975): 95-104; Himure and Lane (5/11).
3. I. Begg and D. Sikich, "Imagery and Contextual Organization," Memory &
Cognition 12 (1984): 52-59.
2. G. H. Bower, "Analysis of a Mnemonic Device,"

Chapter Notes

247

4. Bugelski (8/6, 1974).
5. Luria (3/17), 31-33.
6. Higbee (9/3).
7. Several studies on locations—Johnson and Hasher (1/2). Positively related—
R. De Beni and C. Cornoldi, "Effects of the Mnemotechnique of Loci in the
Memorization of Concrete Words,"
59 (1985): 1-14.
8. R. N. Haber, "The Power of Visual Perceiving,"
5
(1981): 1-16; E. A. Lovelace and S. D. Southall, "Memory for Words in Prose and
Their Locations on the Page,"
11 (1983), 429-34; Rothkopf et
al. (6/8), 50-54.
9. Remembering pictures versus words—Park et al. (3/12). Landmarks—G. W.
Evans, P. L. Brennan, M. A. Skorpanich, and D. Held, "Cognitive Mapping and
Elderly Adults: Verbal and Location Memory for Urban Landmarks,"
39 (1984): 452-57; Link system—Turnure and Lane (5/11).
10.. Lovelace and Southall (10/8).
11. Effects of Different patterns on learning—Bellezza (7/14); Bellezza (9/6).
Learning and note-taking strategies—C. D. Holley and D. F. Dansereau, eds.,
(Orlando, Fla.:
Academic Press, 1984). Fourth graders—R. D. Abbott and R. E. Hughes, "Effect of
Verbal-Graphic Note-Taking Strategies on Writing" (paper presented at the meeting
of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, April 1986).
12. R. E. Rawles, "The Past and Present of Mnemotechny," in Gruneberg (4/
17), 164-71.
13. Provinces and capitals—A. I. Schulman, "Maps and Memorability," in The
ed. D. Rogers and J. A. Sloboda (New York: Plenum
Press, 1982), 359-67. Imaginary island—N. H. Schwartz and R. W. Kulhavy, "Map
Features and the Recall of Discourse,"
6 (1981):
151-58. Creating maplike representation—R. S. Dean and R. W. Kulhavy, "Influence
of Spatial Organization in Prose Learning,"
73
(1981): 57-64.
14. Word lists—De Beni and Cornoldi (10/7); R. De Beni and C. Cornoldi, "The
Effects of Imaginal Mnemonics on Congenitally Total Blind and on Normal Subjects,"
in
ed. D. F. Marks and D. G. Russell (Dunedin, New Zealand: Human
Performance Associates, 1983), 54-59; Roediger (9/4),' 558-67; Snowman (6/2);
Wilson (6/45). Visible loci—S. Kemp and C. D. van der Krogt, "Effect of Visibility of
the Loci on Recall Using the Method of Loci,"
23
(1985): 202-04. Prose Remembering—J. Snowman, E. V Krebs, and L. Lockhart,
"Improving Recall of InformationfromProse in High-risk Students through Learning
Strategy Training,"
7 (1980): 35-40; also see
Snowman (7/15); and R. De Beni, "The Aid Given By the 'Loci' Memory Technique in
the Memorization of Passages," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12).
15. C. E. Weinstein, W. E. Cubberly, F. W. Wicker, V. L. Underwood, L..K.
Roney, and D. C. Duty, "Training Versus Instruction in the Acquisition of Cognitive
Learning Strategies,"
6 (1981): 159-66.
16. Elderly—J. A. Yesavage and T. L. Rose, "Semantic Elaboration and the

Acta Psychologica

Journal ofMental Imagery

Memory & Cognition

Journal of

Gerontology

Learning Strategies: Techniques, Applications, and Related Issues

Spatial

Acquisition of Symbolic Skills,

Contemporary Educational Psychology
Journal of Educational Psychology

Imagery 1,

Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society

Journal of Instructional Psychology

Contemporary Educational Psychology

248

CHAPTER N O T E S

Method of Loci: A New Trip for Old Learners," Experimental Aging Research 10
(1984): 155-60; L. Anschutz, C. J. Camp, R. P. Markley, and J. J. Kramer,
"Maintenance and Generalization of Mnemonics for Grocery Shopping by Older
Adults," Experimental Aging Research 11 (1985): 157-60. Blind Adults—P. A. Raia,
"Cognitive Skill Training of Adventitiously Blinded Elderly Women: The Effects of
Training in the Method of Loci on Free Recall Performance" (Ph.D. diss., University
of Maryland-College Park, 1979); De Beni and Cornoldi (10/14). Brain-damaged
Patients—Wilson (6/45).
17. De Beni and Cornoldi (10/7); G. H. Bower and J. S. Reitman, "Mnemonic
Elaboration in Multilist Learning," Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 11
(1972): 478-85; A. L. Brown, "Progressive Elaboration and Memory for Order in
Children," Journal ofExperimental Child Psychology 19 (1975): 383-400.
18. H. F. Crovitz, Gallon's Walk (New York: Harper & Row, 1970), 44.
CHAPTER

11

1. Paivio (3/18), 173.
2. Bower and Reitman (10/17), 478-85; Bellezza (7/2).
3. Miller etal. (8/1), 135-36.
4. These findings have been summarized by Higbee (9/3) and by Griffith (8/32).
5. Additional studies on effectiveness—F. S. Bellezza and G. H. Bower, "Remembering Script-Based Text," Poetics 11 (1982): 1-23; Roediger (9/4); Wood and
Pratt (8/25). Categories interfere with pegwords—B. G. Reddy and F. S. Bellezza,
"Interference Between Mnemonic and Categorical Organization in Memory," Bulletin
of the Psychonomic Society 24 (1986): 169-71.
6. J. L. Elliot and J. R. Gentile, "The Efficacy of a Mnemonic Technique for
Learning Disabled and Nondisabled Adolescents," Journal of Learning Disabilities 19
(1986): 237-41.
7. Remembering concepts—Dyer and Meyer (7/30). College students—Higbee
and Millard (7/30); Markham et al. (4/6); Wood and Pratt (8/25); Effort—Lowe,
Scoresby, and Higbee (8/37). Children—T. P. Asay, K. L. Higbee, andR. K. Morgan,
"Effects of a Visual Mnemonic on Children's Memory for Sayings" (paper presented
at the meeting of the Rocky Mountain Psychological Association, Albuquerque, N.M.,
April 1982). Adults—Pratt and Higbee (8/25); Wood and Pratt (8/25).
8. Pratt and Higbee (8/25, study 1).
9. Pauk (6/1), 107.
10. Mastropieri et al. (8/19).
11. J. R. Levin, C. B. McCormick, and B. J. Dretzke, "A Combined Pictorial
Mnemonic Strategy for Ordered Information," Educational Communication and
Technology Journal 29 (1981): 219-25.
12. Snowman (7/15). D. T. Veit, T. E. Scruggs, and M. A. Mastropieri,
"Extended Mnemonic Instruction With Learning Disabled Students," Journal of
Educational Psychology 78 (1986): 300-08.
13. J. A. Glover and A. L. Harvey, "Remembering Written Instructions: Tab A
Goes into Slot C, or Does It?" (paper presented at the meeting of the American
Educational Research Association, San Francisco, April 1986); V. Timme, D. Deyloff,

Chapter Notes

249

M. Rogers, D. Dinnel, and J. A. Glover, "Oral Directions; Remembering What to Do
When" (paper presented at the meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, San Francisco, April 1986).
14. Amnesiac patients—C. D. Evans,
(London: Churchill Livingstone, 1981), 72-73. Training Program—B. A. Wilson and N.
Moffat (7/7).
15. K. L. Higbee, "Can Young Children Use Mnemonics?"
38 (1976): 18.
16. B. R. Bugelski, "Images as Mediators in One-Trial Paired-Associate Learning. II: Self-timing in Successive Lists,
77 (1968):
328-34.
17. Bower and Reitman (10/17).
18. Braby et al. (8/32), 60-71.

Rehabilitation of the Head Injured

Psychological Reports

"Journal ofExperimental Psychology

CHAPTER

12

Memoria Technica: or, a New Method of Artificial Memory, 2d ed.
The New Art of Memory, 2d ed. (London: Sherwood,
Phreno-Mnemonotechnic Dictionary: A Philosophical
Classification of all the Homophonic Words of the English Language, partfirst(New
York: Houel & Macay, 1844); James (1/15), 669; A. Loisette, Assimilative Memory, or
How to Attend and Never Forget (New York: Funk & Wagnalls, Inc., 1899); 66-108.
1. R. Grey,
(London: Charles King, 1732).
2. M. G. von Feinaigle,
Neely, & Jones, 1813).
3. F. Fauvel-Gouraud,

4. Furst (9/13); Buzan (9/15); Hersey (9/15).
5. The research up to the mid-1970s is summarized by Higbee (9/3) and by
Griffith (8/32).
6. Metric equivalences—D. Bruce and M. Cleamons, "A Test of the Effectiveness of the Phonetic (Number-Consonant) Mnemonic System,"
1
(1982): 83-93. Second study—P. E. Morris and P. J. Greer, "The Effectiveness of
the Phonetic Mnemonic System,"
3 (1984): 137-42. Third study—
G. W. R. Patton and P. D. Lantzy, "Testing the Limits of the Phonetic Mnemonic
System,"
(in press). See also G. W. R. Patton, "The
Effect of the Phonetic Mnemonic System on Memory for Numerical Material,"
5 (1986): 21-28.
7. T. E. Gordon, P. Gordon, E. Valentine, and J. Wilding, "One Man's Memory:
A Study of a Mnemonist,"
72 (1984): 1-14. (3/19), 114. Scoresby et al. (3/20). Six students—mental calculation—WeUs (3/19), 49-54/59-

Human Learning

Human Learning
Applied Cognitive Psychology

Learning

Human

British Journal of Psychology

61.

8. S. Slak, "Long-Term Retention of Random Sequence Digital Information with
the Aid of Phonemic Recoding: A Case Report,"
33 (1971):
455-60.
9. Paivio, "Strategies in Language Learning" in Pressley and Levin (6/34), 189210; Paivio (3/14), 254-55.
10. Dickel (7/13); S. Slak, "On Phonetic and Phonemic Systems: A Reply to M.
J. Dickel,"
61 (1985): 727-33.

Perceptual and Motor Skills

Perceptual and Motor Skills

250

CHAPTER N O T E S

11. Loisette (12/3), 73-74.
12. E S. Hamilton, Mastering Your Memory (New York: Gramercy Publishing
Co., 1947); see also the sources cited in note 15 of chapter 9.
13. The book is availablefromErnest Weckbaugh, 1718 Rogers Place #1A,
Burbank, Calif. 91504.
14. See the sources cited in note 15 of chapter 9.
CHAPTER

13

1. Elderly—E. M. Zelinski, M. J. Gilewski, and L. W. Thompson, "Do Laboratory Tests Relate to Self-assessment of Memory Ability in the Young and Old?" in
Poon et al. (1/12), 519-44. Patients—B. Wilson, "Memory Therapy in Practice," in
Wilson and Moffat (1/4), 89-111.
2. V. P.—Hunt and Love (3/18), 255. Barker—Family Weekly, September 1975.
Luce—Brothers and Eagan (5/2), 104.
3. Memory for faces—Bahrick (2/20); G. Davies, H. Ellis, and J. Shepherd,
Perceiving and Remembering Faces (London: Academic Press, 1981): Eyewitness
testimony—S. J. .Ceti, M. P. Toglia, and D. E Ross, ed., Children's Eyewitness
Testimony (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987); J. W. Shepherd, H. D. Ellis, and G. M.
Davies, Identification Evidence: A Psychological Evaluation (Aberdeen, Scotland:
Aberdeen University Press, 1982); G. L. Wells and E. F. Loftus, eds., Eyewitness
Testimony: Psychological Perspectives (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984);
S. Lloyd-Bostock and B. R. Clifford, ed., Evaluating Witness Evidence (Chicester,
England: Wiley, 1982).
4. S. Parry and K. L. Higbee, "Remembering People: Research on Memory for
Names and Faces" (paper presented at the meeting of The Rocky Mountain Psychological Association, Las Vegas, April 1984).
5. Horton and Mills (2/22).
6. Reed (2/23).
7. Difference among people—Bahrick et al. (2/18). College students—Bahrick
(2/20). Housewives—Baddeley (2/3), 124. Sex differences—Behrick (2/20); K. A.
Deffenbacher, E. L. Brown, and W. Sturgill, "Some Predictors of Eyewitness
Accuracy," in Gruneberg et al. (4/17), 219-26; S. J. McKelvie, "Sex Differences in
Facial Memory," in Gruneberg et al. (4/17), 263-69.
8. Women—J. C. Bartlett and J. E. Leslie, "Aging and Memory for Faces Versus
Single Views of Faces, "Memory & Cognition 14 (1986): 371-81. Professors—Bahrick
(2/20). Changes—J. C. Bartlett, J. Leslie, and A. Htbbs, "Aging and Memory For
Pictures of Faces" (Paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Seattle, November 1987).
9. 96 percent—K. Deffenbacher, E. Brown, and W. Sturgill, "Memory for Faces
and the Circumstances of Their Encounter" (paper presented at the meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, Denver, November 1975). 75 percent recognition of high
school classmates—Bahrick et al. (2/18).
10. R. J. Phillips, "Recognition, Recall, and Imagery of Faces," in Gruneberg,
Morris, andSykes, (4/17), 270-77.

Chapter Notes

251

11. H. Ellis, J. Shepherd, and G. Davies, "An Investigation of the Use of PhotoFit Technique for Recalling
66 (1975): 29-37.
12. First study—J. D. Read and R. G. Wilbur II, "Availability of Faces and
Names in Recall,"
41 (1975): 263-70. Second study—H.
M. Clarke, "Recall and Recognition for Faces and Names,"
18 (1934): 757-63.
13. Professors—Bahrick (2/20). Classmates—Bahrick et al. (2/18). Name recognition faster—A. Paivio and I. Begg, "Pictures and Words in Visual Search,"
(1974): 515-21.
14. Tip of The Tongue—Burke (2/26). Objectivefrequency—J.F. Hall, "Memory for Surnames,"
19 (1982): 320-22.
15. Recalling names of classmates—Williams and Hollan (4/21). Recalling famous person's name—Yarmey (2/25). Object—J. E. May and K. N. Clayton, "Imaginal
Processes During the Attempt to Recall Names,"
12 (1973): 683-88- Recognition memory and context—A. Goldstein
and J. Chance, "Laboratory Studies of Face Recognition," in Shepherd et al. (13.3),
81-104; Horton and Mills (2/22).
16. S. D. Cox and R. H. Hopkins, "Priming Treatments and Long-term
Memory" (paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Phoenix,
Ariz., November 1979).
17. S. J. Brant, "Name Recall as a Function of Introduction Time,"
50 (1982): 377-78.
18. H. Lorayne,
(New York: Stein &
Day, 1975).
19. A list of memory-training books is given in note 15 of chapter 9. Research
with elderly people, for example, has found practice to be a very important factor in
improving name-face memory, see Poon (1/4), 449.
20. "I know the face but not the name"—Reed (2/23). Self-conscious—C. E.
Kimble and H. D. Zehr, "Self-Consciousness, Information Load, Self-Presentation,
and Memory in a Social Situation
118 (1982): 39-46.
21. B. M. Gadzella and D. A. Whitehead, "Effects of Auditory and Visual
Modalities in Recall of Words,
40 (1975): 255-60.
22. D. L. McCarty, "Investigation of a Visual Imagery Mnemonic Device for
Acquiring Face-Name Associations,"
6 (1980): 145-55.
23. Lorayne (13/18).
24. Several studies—R. S. Malpass, "Training in Face Recognition," in Davies
et al. (13/3), 271-84; Winograd and Simon (7/17). Distinctive feature—E. Winograd,
"Encoding Operations Which Facilitate Memory for Faces Across the Life Span," in
Gruneberg et al. (4/17), 255-62. Told to remember faces—P. G. Devine and R. S.
Malpass, "Orienting Strategies in Differential Face Recognition,"
11 (1985): 33-40.
25. K. Laughery, B. Rhodes, and G. Batten, "Computer-Guided Recognition
and Retrieval of Facial Images," in Shepherd et al. (13/3), 251-70.
26. Attractiveness—J. W. Shepherd and H. D. Ellis, "The Effect of Attractive-

Psychology

Faces," British Journal ofPsychology
Perceptual and Motor Skills
Journal of Applied

Memory & Cognition 2
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society

Journal of Verbal Learning and

Verbal Behavior

Reports

Psychological

Remembering People: The KeytoSuccess

Learning and Memory

Social Psychology Bulletin

"Journal ofSocial Psychology
"Perceptual and Motor Skills
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human

Personality and

252

CHAPTER N O T E S

ness on Recognition Memory for Faces," American Journal of Psychology 86 (1973):
627-33. Race—J. W. Shepherd, J. B. Deregowski, and H. D. Ellis, "A Cross-Cultural
Study of Recognition Memory for Faces," International Journal of Psychology 9
(19747): 205-12. Smile—R. E. Galper and J. Hochberg, "Recognition Memory for
Photographs of Faces, "American Journal ofPsychology 84 (1971): 351-54.
27. J. Shepherd, G. Davies, and H. Ellis, "Studies of Cue Saliency," in
Shepherd, et al. (13/3), 105-32; K. Pezdek and J. K. Reynolds, "Facial Recognition
Memory" (paper presented at the meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Seattle,
November 1987).
28. P. N. Shapiro and S. Penrod, "Meta-Analysis of Facial Identification Studies, " Psychological Bulletin 100(1986): 139-56.
29. Lorayne (13/18), 201.
30. Loftus (2/3), 186.
31. Landauer and Bjork (6/39).
32. A. D. Yarmey, "Proactive Interference in Short-Term Retention of Human
Faces," Canadian Journal of Psychology 28 (1974): 333-38.
33. Same principles as other mnemonics—Turnure and Lane (5/11). Exception
to lack of practicality—Loftus (2/3), 187.
34. First study—P. E. Morris, S. Jones, and P. Hampson, "An Imagery
Mnemonic for the Learning of People's Names," British Journal of Psychology 69
(1978): 335-36. Second study—McCarty (13/22).
35. Elderly—J. A. Yesavage, T. L. Rose, and G. H. Bower, "Interactive
Imagery and Affective Judgments Improve Face-Name Learning in the Elderly,"
Journal of Gerontology 38 (1983): 197-203; J. A. Yesavage and R. Jacob, "Effects of
Relaxation and Mnemonics on Memory, Attention, and Anxiety in the Elderly,"
Experimental Aging Research 10 (1984): 211-14. Brain-damaged patients—Richardson
et al. (8.19); Moffat, "Strategies of Memory Therapy," in Wilson & Moffat (1/4), 6388; Wilson (6/45); R. D. Hill, K. D. Evankovich, J. I. Sheikh, and J. A. Yesavage,
"Imagery Mnemonic Training in a Patient with Primary Degenerative Dementia,"
Psychology & Aging, 2 (1987), 204-05.
36. Lorayne (13/18).
37. S. S. Smith, "A Method for Teaching Name Mnemonics," Teaching of
Psychology 12 (1985): 156-58; C. J. Walker, "An Instamatic Way of Learning Who Is
in Your Large Classes: A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Names," Teaching ofPsychology
7 (1980): 62-63.
CHAPTER

14

1. Harris and Morris (2/20); Reason and Mycielska (2/24).
2. Reason and Mycielska (2/24), 243.
3. Baddeley (2/3); Poon (1/4).
4. Cavanaugh et al. (5/9).
5. Bracken (7/3), 115.
6. Cavanaugh et al. (5/9), 113-22.
7. Elderly—Poon (1/4); D. H. Kausler, "Episodic Memory: Memorizing Performance," in Aging and Human Performance, ed. N. Charness (Chichester, England:

Chapter Notes

253

Wiley, 1985), 101-41. Procrastination—C. H. Lay, "Procrastination and Everyday
Memory," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12).
8. J. E. Harris, "Methods of Improving Memory," in Wilson and Moffat (1/4).
9. J. A. Mecham and J. A. Colombo, "External Retrieval Cues Facilitate Prospective Remembering in Children,"
(1980):
299-301.
10. Richardson et al. (8/19).
11. Thought about doing it—R. E. Anderson, "Did I Do It or Did I Only Imagine
Doing It?"
113 (1984): 594-613; A.
Kbriat and H. Ben-Zur, "Remembering That I Did It: Processes and Deficits in
Output Monitoring," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12); Checkers—Reed (2/23).
12. Harris (7/7).
13. E. Tavon, "Tips to Trigger Memory,"
(Jan./Feb. 1984),
26-27.
14.
October 4-6, 1985.
15. The 1970s quotes are by Allan Paivio, Ernest Hilgard, Gordon Bower, and
Laird Cermak can be found in Higbee (7/1). Book—T. G. Devine,
(Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1981), 286.10 reasons—Levin
(7/33).
16. A large part of this research has been done by Joel Levin and Michael
Pressley and their associates, and much of it has been cited in chapters 7 and 8.
Additional relevant research has been summarized by Higbee (7/1); N. S. Suzuki,
"Imagery Research with Children: Implications for Education," in Sheikh and Sheikh
(4/25), 179-98; and J. R. Levin, "Educational Applications of Mnemonic Pictures:
Possibilities Beyond Your Wildest Imagination," in Sheikh and Sheikh (4/25), 63-87.
17. H. Lorayne,
(New York: Stein & Day, 1976);
H. Lorayne,
(New York: Stein & Day, 1976); M.
Herold,
(Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1982).
18. Good students—Levin (14/16). Gifted students—T. E. Scruggs, M. A.
Mastropieri, J. Monson, and C. Jorgensen, "Maximizing What Gifted Students Can
Learn: Recent Findings of Learning Strategy Research,"
29
(1985): 181-85; T. E. Scruggs and M. A. Mastropieri, "How Gifted Students Learn:
ImplicationsfromRecent Research,"
6 (1984): 183-85.
19. U.S. Department of Education,
(4/20), 37. Teachers' perspective—Devine (14/15), 285-86; C. E. Weinstein and R. E. Mayer, "The Teaching of
Learning Strategies," in Wittrock (4/31), 315-27; Wittrock (4/31).
20. The Japanese mnemonics and U.S. fraction mnemonics are described in
more detail in K. L. Higbee, "Process Mnemonics: Principles, Prospects, and
Problems," in McDaniel and Pressley (3/10), 407-27; and K. L. Higbee and S.
Kunihira, "Cross-Cultural Applications of Yodai Mnemonics,"
20 (1985): 57-64. See also K. Machida, "The Effects of a Verbal Mediation Strategy
on Mathematics Problem Solving." (Ph.D. diss., University of California at Riverside,
1987). The other mnemonics are also described in K. L. Higbee, "Applied Mnemonics
Research Applied" (paper presented at the meeting of the 21st International Congress
of Applied Psychology, Jerusalem, July 1986); and K. L. Higbee, "Practical Aspects
of Mnemonics," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12). For more information on language-skills

The Journal of Educational Research 73

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General

Geriatric Nursing,

USA Weekend,

Teaching Study

Skills: A Guide for Teachers

Good Memory—Good Student
Good Memory—Successful Student
Memorizing Made Easy

Gifted Child Quarterly

RoeperReview
What Works

Educational Psychologist

254

CHAPTER N O T E S

mnemonics, contact Leland Michael, MKM, 809 Kansas City Street, Rapid City, S.
Dak. 57701; and Nancy Stevenson, Stevenson Language Skills, 85 Upland Road,
Attleboro, Mass. 02703. For more information on basic math mnemonics, contact Jan
Semple at Stevenson Language Skills.
21. Chipman and Segal (6/2).
22. Texas Christian University—Dansereau (6/28). Texas—Weinstein and Underwood (5/13). Similar programs—Weinstein and Mayer (14/19).
23. Weinstein and Mayer (14/19).
24. Peterson and Swing (8/26); R. M. Plant, "Reading Research: Its Influence
on Classroom Practice,"
28 (1986), 126-31.
25. Levin and Pressley (8/34), 168.
26. For example, see J. Kilpatrick, "Doing Mathematics Without Understanding
It: A Commentary on Higbee and Kunihira,"
20 (1985): 6568. Compare K. L. Higbee and S. Kunihira, "Some Questions (and a Few Answers)
About Yodai Mnemonics: A Reply to Kilpatrick, Pressley, and Levin,"
20 (1985): 77-81.
27. W. D. Rohwer, Jr., and F. N. Dempster, "Memory Development and
Educational Processes," in
ed. R. V. Kail, Jr., and J. W. Hagen (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1977), 407-35.
28. School tasks—Weinstein and Mayer (14/19), 325. Presidents—Lorayne,
(14/17), 14. Loftier educational goals—Bower (9/8), 70.
29. Goals of education—Chipman and Segal (6/2). Process of education—Shuell
(4/3).
30. Review of memory research—M. J. A. Howe and S. J. Ceci, "Educational
Implications of Memory Research," in
ed. M. M.
Gruneberg and P. E. Morris (New York: Academic Press, 1979), 59. Memorization as
a precursor to understanding—B. Hayes-Roth and C. Walker, "Configural Effects in
Human Memory: The Superiority of Memory Over External Information Sources as a
Basis for Inference Verification,"
3 (1979): 119-40. Inferences—T.
E. Scruggs, M. A. Mostropieri, B. B. McLoone, and J. R. Levin, "Mnemonic
Facilitation of Learning Disabled Students' Memory for Expository Prose,"
79 (1987): 27-34.
31. Reasoning and understanding—T. Trabasso, "The Role of Memory as a
System in Making Transitive Inferences," in Kail and Hagen (14/27), 333-66. Computer program—M. Lebowitz, "Using Memory in Text Understanding," in
ed. J. L. Kolodner and C. K. Reisbeck (Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum, 1986). Concepts—Dyer and Meyer (7/30). Clear thinking—R. Flesch, The
(New York: Barnes & Noble, 1973), 8.
32. Important role of memory—Stern (2/3), chap. 11; J. L. Kolodner and R. L.
Simpson, "Problem Solving and Dynamic Memory," in Kolodner and Riesbeck (14/
31). Studies of problem solving—J. Bransford, R. Sherwood, N. Vye, and J. Rieser,
"Teaching Thinking and Problem Solving: Research Foundations,"
41 (1986): 1078-89. Problem-solving techniques—Bransford and Stein (8/38,
chap. 3); see also J. B. Belmont, L. Freesman, and D. Mitchell, "Problem Solving
and Memory," in Gruneberg et al. (1/12).
33. U.S. Department of Education,
(4/20), 37.

Educational Research

Psychologist

Educational Psychologist
Educational

Perspectives on the Development of Memory and Cognition,

Successful Student

Applied Problems in Memory,

Cognitive Science

Journal of

Educational Psychology

Experience,

Memory, and Reasoning,
Art of Clear Thinking

American Psychol-

ogist

What Works

Index

A
Absentmindedness and memory, 20311
prospective remembering and, 2059
external reminders, 206-9
retrospective remembering and,
209-11
Abstract material, using images for,
108-9
Acronyms, usefulness, 98-101
Acrostics, use, 98-101
Age or youth as affecting ability to
improve memory, myth as to,
9-10
Associating face with name, 198-9
Association, 52-56
reviewing, 199-200
Atkinson, Richard, 101
Attention, paying, effect, 59-61
Bad memories, being stuck with,
myth as to, 6-7
Basic principles for remembering, 46-

61

255

association and, 52-56
"That reminds me," 53-55
thinking around it, techniques
for, 55-56
attention, effects of paying, 59-61
context; effects of learning in certain contexts, 67-69
feedback in learning, effects, 72
application of principle of, 73
interest in things, effects, 69-72
importance, 71
increasing interest and, 71
lack of paying attention, effect, 5961
learning and, 46
meaningfulness, effect, 46-50
familiarity and, 47-48
lack of sense and, 46-47
patterns, usefulness, 49-50
rhymes, effect, 48
organization, effectiveness, 50-53
getting it all together, need for,
50-52
serial position, effect, 53
relaxation, effects, 64-67
stressful situations and, 64-67

256

INDEX

(cont.)

Basic principles for remembering
repetition, importance of, 62-64
overlearning, effect, 63
results, 64
stressful situations, effects of relaxation, 64-67
visualization, effects, 56-59
studies of visual imagery, 57-59

c

Calendar, usefulness of memorizing,
97-98
chunking and, 98
Chain system of mnemonics. See Link
Mnemonics
Characteristics of mnemonic systems.
See specific subject headings
Chunking, process of, 20-21, 98
Cluttering your mind by remembering
too much, myth as to, 13
Comparisons between different types
of mnemonic systems. See
specific subject headings
Context; effects of learning in certain
contexts, 67-69

D
Definition of mnemonics, 94
Demonstrations using Phonetic Mnemonics, 180-81
Digit-sound equivalents as basis for
Phonetic Mnemonics, 173-76

E
Education, use of mnemonics in, 21117
memory in, 215-17
Eidetic memory or imagery, 40
described, 40
limitations on, 40
Effective learning, strategies for, 7492
how well principles and strategies
work, 90-92
interference, effect of reduction of;
factors affecting, 75-78

how well material is learned and,
75
intervening activity, amount of,
75
learning contexts, similarities,
76-77
meaningfulness of material, 75
similarity of intervening activity,
76
time between learning sessions,
77-78
method of learning, 78-83
breaking up study time, effects, 81
whole or part learning, determining
efficiency, 81-83
recitation
defined, 83
usefulness, 83-85
rules for memory, 91-92
spacing learning over time periods,
78-81
cramming, effects, 78-79
effects, 78-81
massed learning, 80
spaced repetitions, 78
students, for, 74-92
study methods, 85-90
criteria for, 85
evaluation, 92
questioning contents of books, 87
reading, 87-88
recitations, 88
reviewing, 88-90
survey method, 85
Exceptional memory abilities, how
they work, 39-43
Exercising memory has effect like exercising muscle, myth as to,

10-12

F
Faces and names of people, using
mnenomics for remembering,
188-202

name memory, factors affecting,
192-93

Index

recall and recognition and, 191-92
recognizing faces, 190-91
recognition and recall and, 19192
research as to memory for people,
189-93
system for remembering, 194-202
association, reviewing, 199-200
face and name, association, 19899
face, focusing on, 196-98 .
getting the name, importance of,
194
how well the system works, 2002
making the name meaningful, 196
Feedback in learning, effects, 72
application of principle of, 73
First letters, use in mnemonics, 98-

101

Forgetting
how fast we forget, 35-37
learninig and forgetting, correlation
between, 36
memory attic as illustrative of mechanisms of forgetting, 34
why and how we forget, 33-35
cue dependency and, 34-35
decay as reason, 33
distortion and, 35
interference and, 34
repression and, 33

G
Grey, Richard, 173

H
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 59
How memory works, 32-45
eidetic imagery, 40
described, 40
limitations on, 40
exceptional memory abilities, how
they work, 39-43
forgetting, why and how we forget,
33-35

257

cue dependency and, 34-35
decay as reason, 33
distortion and, 35
how fast we forget, 35-37
interference and, 34
learning and forgetting, correlation between, 36
memory attic as illustrative of
mechanisms of forgetting, 34
repression and, 33
imagery, usefulness of, 39
visual imagery, 39
photographic memory, 39-43
described, 40
limitations on, 40
pictures vs. words, capacity for
memory of pictures, 38
sleep learning, how well it works,
43-45
sleep stages and, 44
subliminal learning and, 44-45
subliminal learning, 44-45
words vs. pictures, capacity for
memory of pictures, 38

Ideas, remembering, usefulness of
Peg Mnemonics for, 166-68
Imagery, use
specific subject headings
usefulness, 39
visual imagery, 39-40
Improving memory, effects of youth
or age, myths about, 9-10
Interest in things, effect, 69-72
importance, 71
increasing intent and, 71
Interference, effect of reduction of;
factors affecting effective
learning and, 75-78
how well material is learned and, 75
intervening activity, amount of, 75
learning contexts, similarity of, 76-

See also

77

meaningfulness of material, 75
similarity of intervening activity, 76

258

INDEX

(cont.)

Interference
time between learning sessions,
77-78
Introduction to mnemonics, 93-112
specific subject headings

See also

J
James, William, 11

K
Keywords, 101-2
Phonetic Mnemonics, for, 219-22

L
Lack of paying attention, effect, 59,
61
Learners
Effective learning, strategies for
defined, 75
Learning, effective methods of
how well principles and strategies
work, 90-92
interference, effect of reduction of;
factors affecting, 75-78
how well material is learned and,
. 75
intervening activity, amount of,
75
learning contexts, similarities,
76-77
meaningfulness of material, 75
similarity of intervening activity,
76
time between learning sessions,
77-78
method of learning, 78-83
breaking up study time, effects,
81
whole or part learning, determining efficiency, 81-83
recitation
defined, 83
usefulness, 83-85
rules for memory, 91-92
spacing learning over time periods,
78-81

See also

cramming, effects, 78-79
effects, 78-81
massed learning, 80
spaced repetitions, 78
students, for, 74-92
study methods, 85-90
criteria for, 85
evaluation, 92
questioning contents of books,
87
reading, 87-88
recitations, 88
reviewing, 88-90
survey method, 85
Legitimacy of limitations and pseudolimitations on mnemonics,
113-30
Limitations on mnemonics;
Pseudo-limitations on mnemonics
Limitations on mnemonics, 113-21
abstract material and, 116-17
imagery ability and, 118-19
interference and, 119-20
learning and retention, 117-18
maintenance and transfer and, 12021
retention and learning and, 117-78
transfer and maintenance and, 12021
Link Mnemonics
demonstrations, 137-38
effectiveness, 136-38
lists of things, using for, 139-41
Loci system, combining with, 15556
reports or speeches, using for,
141-42
speeches or reports, using for,
141-42
using, 139-43
Lists of things, using in Link Mnemonics, 139-41
Locations, memory for, Loci Mnemonics and, 150-51
using location to aid memory, 15152

See also

Index
Loci Mnemonics, 144-56
ancient form of mnemonics, 144
characteristics of, 144-49
combining with Story or Link systems, 156
described, 144-49
Link system, combining with, 156
locations, memory for, 150-51
using locations to aid memory,
151-52
mental filing system, as, 153
same Loci, using over and over
again, 154
origin, 145
Peg system, comparison with, 16162
same Loci, using over and over
again, 154
Story system, combining with, 156
usefulness, 149-53
using, 145-47, 151-52, 153-56
Long-term memory
described, 22-25
episodic memory, 22-24
procedural memory, 22
semantic memory, 22-23
short-term memory, relationship
with, 24-25
diagrammed, 25
types, 22-25
M
Making names memorable, effect, 196
Making up own mnemonics, usefulness, 109-11
Meaningfulness, effect, 46-50
familiarity and, 47-48
lack of sense and, 46-47
patterns, usefulness, 49-50
rhymes, effect, 48
Measuring memory, 26-29
recall and,
recognition as measurement, 27-29
Memorizing, easy way as to, myth as
to, 4-6
bad memories, myth as to people
having, 6-7

26-27

259

Memory attic as illustrative of mechanisms of forgetting, 34
Memory in education, 215-17
Mentalfilingsystems
Link Mnemonics
demonstrations, 137-38
effectiveness, 136-38
lists of things, using for, 139-41
Loci system, combining with,
155-56
reports or speeches, using for,
141-42
speeches or reports, using for,
141-42
using, 139-43
Loci Mnemonics, 144-56
ancient form of mnemonics,
144
characteristics of, 144-49
combining with Link or Story
systems, 156
described, 144-49
Link system, combining with,
156
locations, memory for, 150-52
origin, 145
Peg system, comparison with,
161-62

same Loci, using over and over
again, 154
Story system, combining with,
156
usefulness, 149-53
using, 145-47, 151-52, 153-56
Peg Mnemonics, 157-71
alphabet pegs, 160
described, 157-62
ideas, usefulness for remembering, 166-68
Loci Mnemonics, combining with,
161-62

numbers, usefulness in remembering, 168-69
origin, 158-69
pegwords, using over and over
again, 169-71
repetition of pegwords, 169-71

260

INDEX

(cont.)

Mentalfilingsystems
research studies as to effectiveness of, 163-64
schoolwork, effectiveness in, 165
usefulness of, 166-69
using, 158-59, 166-71
Phonetic Mnemonics
demonstrations using, 180-81
described, 172-78
digit-soUnd equivalents as basis
for, 173-76
Grey, Richard, effect, 173
keywords for, 219-22
numbers, remembering, 183-86
origin of, 173
Scriptures, program developed
for learning based on, 186-87
sophistication of, 172
studies as to, 179-80
usefulness, 178-87
using the system, 176-87
versatility of, 172
von Feinagle, Gregor, 173
Winkelman, introduction by, 173
Story Mnemonics
demonstrations, 137-38
effectiveness, 136-38
lists of things, using for, 139-41
reports or speeches, using for,
141-42
speeches or reports, using for,
141-42
using, 139-43
Miracles, working with your memory.
See Mnemonics
Mnemonics, generally
absentmindedness and, 203-11
external remedies and, 206-9
prospective remembering and,
206-9
retrospective remembering and,
209-11

abstract material, using images for,
108-9
acronyms, usefulness, 98-101
acrostics, use, 98-101

basic principles of, 102-4
association and, 103
attention and, 103
generally, 102-4
meaningfulness, 103
organization, 103
visualization, 103
calendar, usefulness of memorizing,
97-98
chunking and, 98
chain system. See Link Mnemonics
chunking, 98
defined, 94
education, use in, 211-17
memory in, 215-17
Nakane, Masachika, 213
first letters, 98-101
introduction to, 93-112
keywords, 101-2
legitimacy of limitations and pseudolimitations, 113-30
Limitations; PseudoLimitations
limitations of, 113—21
abstract material and, 116-17
imagery ability and, 118-19
interference and, 119-20
learning and retention, 117-18
maintenance and transfer and,

See also

120-21

retention and learning, 117-18
time as factor, 114-16
transfer and maintenance and,
.

120-21

verbatim memory and, 119
Link mnenomics
demonstrations, 137-38
effectiveness, 136-38
lists of things, using for, 139-41
Loci system, combining with,
155-56
reports or speeches, using for,
141-42
using, 139-43
Loci system, 144-56
ancient form of mnemonics, 144

Index
characteristics of, 144-49
combining with Link or Story
systems, 156
described, 144-49
Link system, combining with,
156
locations, memory for, 150-52
mentalfilingsystem, as, 153
origin, 145
Peg system, comparison with,
161-62

same Loci, using over and over,
154
Story system, combining with,
156
usefulness, 149-53
using, 145-47, 151-52, 153-56
making up own mnemonics, usefulness, 109-11
mentalfilingsystems. See Mental
filing systems
Nakane, Masachika, 213
Peg mnemonics, 157-71
alphabet pegs, 160
described, 157-62
effectiveness, 162-66
ideas, usefulness for remembering, 166-68
Loci mnemonics, combining with,
161-62

261

research on memory for people,
189-93
system for remembering, 194202.
People's names
and faces, using mnemonics for
remembering
Phonetic mnemonics
demonstrations using, 180-81
described, 172-78
digit-sound equivalents as basis
for, 173-76
Grey, Richard, effect, 173
keywords for, 210-22
numbers, remembering, 183-86
origin of, 173
Scriptures, program developed
for learning based on, 186-87
sophistication of, 172
studies as to, 179-80
usefulness, 178-87
using the system, 176-87
versatility of, 172
von Feinagle, Gregor, 173
Winkelman, introduction by, 173
pronunciation, 94
pseudo-limitations, 121-30
rhymes, use, 95-96
samples, 95-96
stage mnemonists, feats of, 93
verbal and visual forms, 94
verbal association, effectiveness,

See also

numbers, usefulness in remem111-12
bering, 168-69
origin, 158-59
visual associations, making effective use of, 104-12
pegwords, using over and over
visual forms, 94
again, 169-71
Myths about memory, 1-15
repetition of pegwords, 168-71
age as affecting ability to improve
research studies as to effectiveness of, 163-64
memory, 9-10
schoolwork, effectiveness in, 165
bad memories, people being stuck
using, 158-59, 166-71
with, 6-7
people's names andfeces,using
, cluttering memory by remembering
mnemonics for remembering,
too much, 13
188-202
execising memory has effect like
name memory, factors affecting,
exercising muscle, 10-12
192-93
improving memory, effects of age
recognizing faces, 190-92
or youth, 9-10

262

INDEX

(cont.)

Myths about memory
memorizing, easy way as to, 4-6
only ten percent of mental potential
is used, 14-15
photographic memories, people are
blessed with,. 7-8
remembering too much can clutter
your mind, 13
secret to a good memory, existence
of, 3-4
thing, memory as, 2-3
trained memory never forgets, 1213

Organization, effectiveness, 50-53
getting it altogether, need for, 5052
serial position effect and, 53

P
Peg Mnemonics, 157-71
alphabet pegs, 160
described, 157-62
effectiveness, 162-66
research studies as to, 163-64
ideas, usefulness for remembering,
166-68

Loci mnemonics, combining with,
161-62

N
Nakane, Masachika, 213
Name memory, factors affecting, 19293
Names and faces of people, using
mnenomics for remembering,
188-202

name memory, factors affecting,
192-93
recall and recognition, 191-92
recognizing faces, 190-91
recognition and recall and, 19192
research as to memory for people,
189-93
system for remembering, 194-202
association, reviewing, 199-200
face and name, association, 19899
face, focusing on, 196-98
getting the name, importance of,
194
how well the system works, 2002
making the name meaningful, 196
Numbers, remembering, 183-86
usefulness in remembering, 168-69
o
Only 10 percent of mental potential is
used, myth as to, 14-15

numbers, usefulness in remembering, 168-69
origin, 158-59
pegwords, using over and over,
169-71
repetition of pegwords, 169-71
research studies as to effectiveness
of, 163-64
schoolwork, usefulness in, 165
usefulness
ideas, remembering, 166-68
numbers, remembering, 168-69
schoolwork, remembering, 165
using 158-59, 166-71
Fteople's names and faces, using
mnenomics for remembering,
188-202

name memory, factors affecting,
192-93
system for remembering, 194-202
association, reviewing, 199-200
face and name, associating, 19899
face, focusing on, 196-98
getting the name, importance of,
194
how well system works, 200-2
making the name meaningful, 196
recognizing faces, 190-91
recognition and recall, 191-92
research on memory for people,
189-93

Index

Phonetic Mnemonics
demonstrations using, 180-81
described, 172-78
digit-sound equivalents as basis for,
173-76
Grey, Richard, effect, 173
keywords for, 219-22
numbers, remembering, 183-86
origin of, 173
Scriptures, program developed for
learning based on, 186-87
sophistication of, 172
studies as to, 179-80
usefulness, 178-87
using the system, 176-87
versatility of, 172
vonFeinagle, Gregor, 173
Winkelman, introduction by, 173
Photographic memory, 39-43
described, 40
limitations, 40
people who are blessed with, myth
as to, 7-8
Pictures vs. words
capacity for memory of pictures, 38
Processes and stages of memory, 1719
acquisition stage, 17-19
retrieval stage, 17-19
storage stage, 17-19
Pronunciation, 94
Pseudo-limitations of mnemonics,
121-30
crutches, mnemonics, as 127-29
mnemonics gives you more to remember, 125-27
practicality of mnemonics as issue,
122-24
tricks, mnemonics as, 129-30
understanding not aided by mnemonics, 124-25

R
Recitation
defined, 83
usefulness of, 83-85

263

Recognizing faces, 190-91
recognition and recall, 191-92
Relaxation, effects, 64-67
stressful situations and, 64-67
Remembering, basic principles for,
46-61
association and, 52-56
"That reminds me", 53-55
thinking around it, techniques
for, 55-56
attention, effects for paying, 59-

61

context; effects of learning in certain contexts, 67-9
feedback in learning, effects, 72
application of principle of, 73
interest in things, effects, 69-72
importance, 71
increasing interest and, 71
lack of paying attention, effect, 59-

61

learning and, 46
meaningfulness, effect, 46-50
familiarity and, 47-48
lack of sense and, 46-47
patterns, usefulness, 49-50
rhymes, effect, 48
organization, effectiveness, 50-53
getting it all together, need for,
50-52
serial position, effect, 53
relaxation, effects, 64-67
stressful situations and, 64-67
repetition, importance of, 62-64
overlearning, effect, 63
results, 64
stressful situations, effects of relaxation, 64-67
visualization, effects, 56-59
studies of visual imagery, 57-59
Repetition, importance of, 62-64
overlearning, effect, 63
results, 64
Research studies as to mnemonics.
See specific subject headings
Rhymes, use, 95-96
Rules for memory, 91-92

264

INDEX

T
Schoolwork, usefulness of Peg Mnemonics in, 165
Scriptures, program developed for
learning based on; Phonetic
Mnemonics, 186-87
Secret to good memory, myth as to
existence of, 3-4
Short-term memory, 19-22
chunking process and, 20-21
described, 19-22
relationship to long-term memory,
24-25
diagrammed, 25
Sleep learning, how well it works, 4345
sleep stages and, 44
subliminal learning, 44-45
Sophistication of Phonetic Mnemonics, 172
Spacing learning over time periods, effect, 78-81
cramming, 78-79
massed learning, 80
spaced repetition, 78
Stage mnemonists, feats of, 93
Stages and processes of memory, 1719
acquisition stage, 17-19
retrieval stage, 17-19
storage stage, 17-19
Story Mnemonics
demonstrations, 137-38
effectiveness, 136-38
lists of things, using for, 139-41
reports or speeches, using for,
141-42
speeches or reports, using for,
141-42
using, 139-43
Studies as to specific types of mnemonics, See specific subject
headings
Subliminal learning; sleep learning,
44-45

Thing, memory as, 2-3
Time as factor in mnemonics, 114-16
Tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon
described, 29-31
implications for understanding what
memory is, 30-33
Trained memory never forgets, myth
as to, 12-13

U

Usefulness of mnemonics. See specific
subject headings
Using the mnemonic systems. See
specific subject headings

V
Verbal and visual forms of mnemonics,
94
Verbal associations, effectiveness,
111-12

Verbatim memory, limitations of, 119
Versatility of Phonetic Mnemonics,
172
Visual associations, making effective
use of, 104-112
bizareness, effect, 107-8
interaction and, 104-5
vividness and, 105
Visual and verbal forms of mnemonics,
94
Visualization, effect, 56-59
studies of visual imagery, 57-59
Von Feinagle, Gregor, 173

W
Wechsler Memory Scale, 3
What memory is, 16-31
specific subject headings
long-term memory
described, 22-25
diagram of short-term memorylong-term memory relationship, 25
episodic memory, 22-24
procedural memory, 22

See also

Index

semantic memory, 22-23
short-term memory, relationship
with; diagram of, 24-25
types of, 22-25
measuring memory, 26-29
recall, 26-27
recognition, 27-29
short-term memory, 19-22
chunking process, 20-21
described, 19-22
diagram of relationship between
long-term memory and, 25
long-term memory and; diagram
of, 24-25
what good it is, 21-22
stages and processes of memory,
17-19
acquisition stage, 17-19
storage stage, 17-19
retrieval stage, 17-19
tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon
described, 29-31
implications for understanding
what memory is, 30-31
What you can expectfromyour memory
specific subject headings
Myths about
age as affecting ability to improve
memory, 9-10

See also

265

bad memories, people being
stuck with, 6-7
cluttering memory by remembering too much, 13
exercising memory has same effect as exercising muscle, 1012
improving memory, effects of
youth or age, 9-10
memorizing, easy way as to, 4-6
only 10 percent of mental potential is used, 14-15
photographic memories, being
. blessed with, 7-8
remembering too much can clutter your mind, 13
secret to a good memory, existence of, 3-4
thing, memory as, 2-3
trained memory never forgets,
12-13
Winkelman, introduction of Phonetic
Mnemonics by, 173
Words vs. pictures
capacity for memory of pictures, 38

Y
Youth or age as affecting ability to improve memory, myths as to,
9-10

About the Author
Kenneth L. Higbee is a professor of psychology at Brigham Young
University, where he teaches on-campus and home-study memory
courses. He also conducts research on memory, and has published
numerous scientific articles. In addition, he has given hundreds of
lectures and workshops, teaching memory skills and reporting his memory research throughout the United States and in several other countries.

